<?xml version="1.0" encoding="utf-8"?>
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xmlns:epub="http://www.idpf.org/2007/ops" epub:prefix="z3998: http://www.daisy.org/z3998/2012/vocab/structure/, se: https://standardebooks.org/vocab/1.0" xml:lang="en-GB">
	<head>
		<title>Act 1</title>
		<link href="../css/core.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
		<link href="../css/local.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
	</head>
	<body epub:type="bodymatter z3998:fiction z3998:drama">
		<section id="act-1" epub:type="chapter z3998:scene">
			<h2 epub:type="title">Act <span epub:type="z3998:roman">I</span></h2>
			<section id="scene-1-1" epub:type="z3998:scene">
				<h3>Scene <span epub:type="z3998:roman">I</span></h3>
				<p><i>A Chocolate-house</i>.</p>
				<p><b epub:type="z3998:persona">Mirabell</b> and <b epub:type="z3998:persona">Fainall</b> rising from cards. <b epub:type="z3998:persona">Betty</b> waiting.</p>
				<table>
					<tbody>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Mirabell</td>
							<td>You are a fortunate man, <abbr>Mr.</abbr> Fainall.</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Fainall</td>
							<td>Have we done?</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Mirabell</td>
							<td>What you please. I’ll play on to entertain you.</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Fainall</td>
							<td>No, I’ll give you your revenge another time, when you are not so indifferent; you are thinking of something else now, and play too negligently: the coldness of a losing gamester lessens the pleasure of the winner. I’d no more play with a man that slighted his ill fortune than I’d make love to a woman who undervalued the loss of her reputation.</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Mirabell</td>
							<td>You have a taste extremely delicate, and are for refining on your pleasures.</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Fainall</td>
							<td>Prithee, why so reserved? Something has put you out of humour.</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Mirabell</td>
							<td>Not at all: I happen to be grave today, and you are gay; that’s all.</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Fainall</td>
							<td>Confess, Millamant and you quarrelled last night, after I left you; my fair cousin has some humours that would tempt the patience of a Stoic. What, some coxcomb came in, and was well received by her, while you were by?</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Mirabell</td>
							<td>Witwoud and Petulant, and what was worse, her aunt, your wife’s mother, my evil genius⁠—or to sum up all in her own name, my old Lady Wishfort came in.</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Fainall</td>
							<td>Oh, there it is then: she has a lasting passion for you, and with reason.⁠—What, then my wife was there?</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Mirabell</td>
							<td>Yes, and <abbr>Mrs.</abbr> Marwood and three or four more, whom I never saw before; seeing me, they all put on their grave faces, whispered one another, then complained aloud of the vapours, and after fell into a profound silence.</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Fainall</td>
							<td>They had a mind to be rid of you.</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Mirabell</td>
							<td>For which reason I resolved not to stir. At last the good old lady broke through her painful taciturnity with an invective against long visits. I would not have understood her, but Millamant joining in the argument, I rose and with a constrained smile told her, I thought nothing was so easy as to know when a visit began to be troublesome; she reddened and I withdrew, without expecting her reply.</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Fainall</td>
							<td>You were to blame to resent what she spoke only in compliance with her aunt.</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Mirabell</td>
							<td>She is more mistress of herself than to be under the necessity of such a resignation.</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Fainall</td>
							<td>What! though half her fortune depends upon her marrying with my lady’s approbation?</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Mirabell</td>
							<td>I was then in such a humour, that I should have been better pleased if she had been less discreet.</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Fainall</td>
							<td>Now I remember, I wonder not they were weary of you; last night was one of their cabal nights: they have ’em three times a week and meet by turns at one another’s apartments, where they come together like the coroner’s inquest, to sit upon the murdered reputations of the week. You and I are excluded, and it was once proposed that all the male sex should be excepted; but somebody moved that to avoid scandal there might be one man of the community, upon which motion Witwoud and Petulant were enrolled members.</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Mirabell</td>
							<td>And who may have been the foundress of this sect? My Lady Wishfort, I warrant, who publishes her detestation of mankind, and full of the vigour of fifty-five, declares for a friend and ratafia;<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-9" id="noteref-9" epub:type="noteref">9</a> and let posterity shift for itself, she’ll breed no more.</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Fainall</td>
							<td>The discovery of your sham addresses to her, to conceal your love to her niece, has provoked this separation. Had you dissembled better, things might have continued in the state of nature.<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-10" id="noteref-10" epub:type="noteref">10</a></td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Mirabell</td>
							<td>I did as much as man could, with any reasonable conscience; I proceeded to the very last act of flattery with her, and was guilty of a song in her commendation. Nay, I got a friend to put her into a lampoon, and compliment her with the imputation of an affair with a young fellow, which I carried so far, that I told her the malicious town took notice that she was grown fat of a sudden; and when she lay in of a dropsy, persuaded her she was reported to be in labour. The devil’s in’t, if an old woman is to be flattered further, unless a man should endeavour downright personally to debauch her: and that my virtue forbade me. But for the discovery of this amour, I am indebted to your friend, or your wife’s friend, <abbr>Mrs.</abbr> Marwood.</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Fainall</td>
							<td>What should provoke her to be your enemy, unless she has made you advances which you have slighted? Women do not easily forgive omissions of that nature.</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Mirabell</td>
							<td>She was always civil to me, till of late. I confess I am not one of those coxcombs who are apt to interpret a woman’s good manners to her prejudice, and think that she who does not refuse ’em everything can refuse ’em nothing.</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Fainall</td>
							<td>You are a gallant man, Mirabell; and though you may have cruelty enough not to satisfy a lady’s longing, you have too much generosity not to be tender of her honour. Yet you speak with an indifference which seems to be affected, and confesses you are conscious of a negligence.</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Mirabell</td>
							<td>You pursue the argument with a distrust that seems to be unaffected, and confesses you are conscious of a concern for which the lady is more indebted to you than is your wife.</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Fainall</td>
							<td>Fie, fie, friend, if you grow censorious I must leave you.⁠—I’ll look upon the gamesters in the next room.</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Mirabell</td>
							<td>Who are they?</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Fainall</td>
							<td>Petulant and Witwoud.⁠—<i class="editorial" epub:type="z3998:stage-direction">To <b epub:type="z3998:persona">Betty</b>.</i> Bring me some chocolate. <i class="editorial" epub:type="z3998:stage-direction">Exit.</i></td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Mirabell</td>
							<td>Betty, what says your clock?</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Betty</td>
							<td>Turned of the last canonical hour,<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-11" id="noteref-11" epub:type="noteref">11</a> sir. <i class="editorial" epub:type="z3998:stage-direction">Exit.</i></td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Mirabell</td>
							<td>How pertinently the jade answers me! <i class="editorial" epub:type="z3998:stage-direction">Looking on his watch.</i> Ha! almost one a’ clock!⁠—Oh, y’are come!</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td/>
							<td>
								<i class="editorial" epub:type="z3998:stage-direction">Enter <b epub:type="z3998:persona">Footman</b>.</i>
							</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Mirabell</td>
							<td>Well, is the grand affair over? You have been something tedious.</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Footman</td>
							<td>Sir, there’s such coupling at Pancras<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-12" id="noteref-12" epub:type="noteref">12</a> that they stand behind one another, as ’twere in a country-dance. Ours was the last couple to lead up; and no hopes appearing of dispatch, besides, the parson growing hoarse, we were afraid his lungs would have failed before it came to our turn; so we drove round to Duke’s Place,<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-13" id="noteref-13" epub:type="noteref">13</a> and there they were riveted in a trice.</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Mirabell</td>
							<td>So, so, you are sure they are married?</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Footman</td>
							<td>Married and bedded, sir; I am witness.</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Mirabell</td>
							<td>Have you the certificate?</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Footman</td>
							<td>Here it is, sir.</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Mirabell</td>
							<td>Has the tailor brought Waitwell’s clothes home, and the new liveries?</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Footman</td>
							<td>Yes, sir.</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Mirabell</td>
							<td>That’s well. Do you go home again, d’ye hear, and adjourn the consummation till farther order. Bid Waitwell shake his ears, and Dame Partlet<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-14" id="noteref-14" epub:type="noteref">14</a> rustle up her feathers, and meet me at one o’clock by Rosamond’s Pond,<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-15" id="noteref-15" epub:type="noteref">15</a> that I may see her before she returns to her lady. And, as you tender your ears, be secret.</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td/>
							<td>
								<i class="editorial" epub:type="z3998:stage-direction">Exeunt.</i>
							</td>
						</tr>
					</tbody>
				</table>
			</section>
			<section id="scene-1-2" epub:type="z3998:scene">
				<h3>Scene <span epub:type="z3998:roman">II</span></h3>
				<p>The same.</p>
				<p><b epub:type="z3998:persona">Mirabell</b>, <b epub:type="z3998:persona">Fainall</b>, and <b epub:type="z3998:persona">Betty</b>.</p>
				<table>
					<tbody>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Fainall</td>
							<td>Joy of your success, Mirabell; you look pleased.</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Mirabell</td>
							<td>Ay; I have been engaged in a matter of some sort of mirth, which is not yet ripe for discovery. I am glad this is not a cabal-night. I wonder, Fainall, that you who are married, and of consequence should be discreet, will suffer your wife to be of such a party.</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Fainall</td>
							<td>Faith, I am not jealous. Besides, most who are engaged are women and relations; and for the men, they are of a kind too contemptible to give scandal.</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Mirabell</td>
							<td>I am of another opinion: the greater the coxcomb, always the more the scandal; for a woman who is not a fool can have but one reason for associating with a man who is one.</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Fainall</td>
							<td>Are you jealous as often as you see Witwoud entertained by Millamant?</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Mirabell</td>
							<td>Of her understanding I am, if not of her person.</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Fainall</td>
							<td>You do her wrong; for, to give her her due, she has wit.</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Mirabell</td>
							<td>She has beauty enough to make any man think so, and complaisance enough not to contradict him who shall tell her so.</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Fainall</td>
							<td>For a passionate lover methinks you are a man somewhat too discerning in the failings of your mistress.</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Mirabell</td>
							<td>And for a discerning man somewhat too passionate a lover, for I like her with all her faults; nay, like her for her faults. Her follies are so natural, or so artful, that they become her, and those affectations which in another woman would be odious serve but to make her more agreeable. I’ll tell thee, Fainall, she once used me with that insolence that in revenge I took her to pieces, sifted her, and separated her failings: I studied ’em and got ’em by rote. The catalogue was so large that I was not without hopes, one day or other, to hate her heartily. To which end I so used myself to think of ’em, that at length, contrary to my design and expectation, they gave me every hour less and less disturbance, till in a few days it became habitual to me to remember ’em without being displeased. They are now grown as familiar to me as my own frailties, and in all probability in a little time longer I shall like ’em as well.</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Fainall</td>
							<td>Marry her, marry her; be half as well acquainted with her charms as you are with her defects, and, my life on’t, you are your own man again.</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Mirabell</td>
							<td>Say you so?</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Fainall</td>
							<td>Ay, ay; I have experience. I have a wife, and so forth.</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td/>
							<td>
								<i epub:type="z3998:stage-direction">Enter <b epub:type="z3998:persona">Messenger</b>.</i>
							</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Messenger</td>
							<td>Is one squire Witwoud here?</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Betty</td>
							<td>Yes; what’s your business?</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Messenger</td>
							<td>I have a letter for him, from his brother Sir Wilfull, which I am charged to deliver into his own hands.</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Betty</td>
							<td>He’s in the next room, friend. That way.</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td/>
							<td>
								<i class="editorial" epub:type="z3998:stage-direction">Exit <b epub:type="z3998:persona">Messenger</b>.</i>
							</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Mirabell</td>
							<td>What, is the chief of that noble family in town, Sir Wilfull Witwoud?</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Fainall</td>
							<td>He is expected today. Do you know him?</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Mirabell</td>
							<td>I have seen him; he promises to be an extraordinary person. I think you have the honour to be related to him.</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Fainall</td>
							<td>Yes; he is half-brother to this Witwoud by a former wife, who was sister to my Lady Wishfort, my wife’s mother. If you marry Millamant, you must call cousins too.</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Mirabell</td>
							<td>I had rather be his relation than his acquaintance.</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Fainall</td>
							<td>He comes to town in order to equip himself for travel.</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Mirabell</td>
							<td>For travel! Why the man that I mean is above forty.</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Fainall</td>
							<td>No matter for that; ’tis for the honour of England that all Europe should know we have blockheads of all ages.</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Mirabell</td>
							<td>I wonder there is not an act of parliament to save the credit of the nation and prohibit the exportation of fools.</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Fainall</td>
							<td>By no means, ’tis better as ’tis; ’tis better to trade with a little loss, than to be quite eaten up with being overstocked.</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Mirabell</td>
							<td>Pray, are the follies of this knight-errant and those of the squire, his brother, anything related?</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Fainall</td>
							<td>Not at all: Witwoud grows by the knight like a medlar grafted on a crab. One will melt in your mouth and t’other set your teeth on edge; one is all pulp and the other all core.</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Mirabell</td>
							<td>So one will be rotten before he be ripe, and the other will be rotten without ever being ripe at all.</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Fainall</td>
							<td>Sir Wilfull is an odd mixture of bashfulness and obstinacy. But when he’s drunk, he’s as loving as the monster in <i epub:type="se:name.publication.play">The Tempest</i>,<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-16" id="noteref-16" epub:type="noteref">16</a> and much after the same manner. To give t’other his due, he has something of good-nature, and does not always want wit.</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Mirabell</td>
							<td>Not always: but as often as his memory fails him and his commonplace of comparisons.<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-17" id="noteref-17" epub:type="noteref">17</a> He is a fool with a good memory and some few scraps of other folks’ wit. He is one whose conversation can never be approved, yet it is now and then to be endured. He has indeed one good quality: he is not exceptious, for he so passionately affects the reputation of understanding raillery that he will construe an affront into a jest, and call downright rudeness and ill language satire and fire.</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Fainall</td>
							<td>If you have a mind to finish his picture, you have an opportunity to do it at full length. Behold the original.</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td/>
							<td>
								<i epub:type="z3998:stage-direction">Enter <b epub:type="z3998:persona">Witwoud</b>.</i>
							</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Witwoud</td>
							<td>Afford me your compassion, my dears! Pity me, Fainall, Mirabell, pity me.</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Mirabell</td>
							<td>I do from my soul.</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Fainall</td>
							<td>Why, what’s the matter?</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Witwoud</td>
							<td>No letters for me, Betty?</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Betty</td>
							<td>Did not a messenger bring you one but now, sir?</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Witwoud</td>
							<td>Ay, but no other?</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Betty</td>
							<td>No, sir.</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Witwoud</td>
							<td>That’s hard, that’s very hard.⁠—A messenger! A mule, a beast of burden, he has brought me a letter from the fool my brother, as heavy as a panegyric in a funeral sermon, or a copy of commendatory verses from one poet to another. And what’s worse, ’tis as sure a forerunner of the author as an epistle dedicatory.</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Mirabell</td>
							<td>A fool, and your brother, Witwoud!</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Witwoud</td>
							<td>Ay, ay, my half-brother. My half-brother he is, no nearer, upon honour.</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Mirabell</td>
							<td>Then ’tis possible he may be but half a fool.</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Witwoud</td>
							<td>Good, good, Mirabell, <i>le drôle</i>! Good, good, hang him, don’t let’s talk of him.⁠—Fainall, how does your lady? Gad, I say anything in the world to get this fellow out of my head. I beg pardon that I should ask a man of pleasure and the town a question at once so foreign and domestic. But I talk like an old maid at a marriage, I don’t know what I say: but she’s the best woman in the world.</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Fainall</td>
							<td>’Tis well you don’t know what you say, or else your commendation would go near to make me either vain or jealous.</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Witwoud</td>
							<td>No man in town lives well with a wife but Fainall.⁠—Your judgment, Mirabell.</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Mirabell</td>
							<td>You had better step and ask his wife, if you would be credibly informed.</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Witwoud</td>
							<td>Mirabell!</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Mirabell</td>
							<td>Ay.</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Witwoud</td>
							<td>My dear, I ask ten thousand pardons⁠—gad, I have forgot what I was going to say to you.</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Mirabell</td>
							<td>I thank you heartily, heartily.</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Witwoud</td>
							<td>No, but prithee excuse me:⁠—my memory is such a memory.</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Mirabell</td>
							<td>Have a care of such apologies, Witwoud; for I never knew a fool but he affected to complain either of the spleen or his memory.</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Fainall</td>
							<td>What have you done with Petulant?</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Witwoud</td>
							<td>He’s reckoning his money⁠—my money it was⁠—I have no luck today.</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Fainall</td>
							<td>You may allow him to win of you at play, for you are sure to be too hard for him at repartee: since you monopolise the wit that is between you, the fortune must be his of course.</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Mirabell</td>
							<td>I don’t find that Petulant confesses the superiority of wit to be your talent, Witwoud.</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Witwoud</td>
							<td>Come, come, you are malicious now, and would breed debates.⁠—Petulant’s my friend, and a very honest fellow, and a very pretty fellow, and has a smattering⁠—faith and troth, a pretty deal of an odd sort of a small wit: nay, I’ll do him justice. I’m his friend, I won’t wrong him neither.⁠—And if he had any judgment in the world, he would not be altogether contemptible. Come, come, don’t detract from the merits of my friend.</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Fainall</td>
							<td>You don’t take your friend to be over-nicely bred?</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Witwoud</td>
							<td>No, no, hang him, the rogue has no manners at all, that I must own; no more breeding than a bum-baily, that I grant you⁠—’tis pity; the fellow has fire and life.</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Mirabell</td>
							<td>What, courage?</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Witwoud</td>
							<td>Hum, faith, I don’t know as to that, I can’t say as to that. Yes, faith, in a controversy he’ll contradict anybody.</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Mirabell</td>
							<td>Though ’twere a man whom he feared or a woman whom he loved.</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Witwoud</td>
							<td>Well, well, he does not always think before he speaks. We have all our failings; you are too hard upon him, you are, faith. Let me excuse him⁠—I can defend most of his faults, except one or two; one he has, that’s the truth on’t; if he were my brother I could not acquit him⁠—that, indeed, I could wish were otherwise.</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Mirabell</td>
							<td>Ay, marry, what’s that, Witwoud?</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Witwoud</td>
							<td>Oh, pardon me!⁠—Expose the infirmities of my friend? No, my dear, excuse me there.</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Fainall</td>
							<td>What, I warrant he’s unsincere, or ’tis some such trifle.</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Witwoud</td>
							<td>No, no; what if he be? ’Tis no matter for that, his wit will excuse that. A wit should no more be sincere than a woman constant: one argues a decay of parts, as t’other of beauty.</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Mirabell</td>
							<td>Maybe you think him too positive?</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Witwoud</td>
							<td>No, no; his being positive is an incentive to argument, and keeps up conversation.</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Fainall</td>
							<td>Too illiterate?</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Witwoud</td>
							<td>That? That’s his happiness. His want of learning gives him the more opportunities to show his natural parts.</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Mirabell</td>
							<td>He wants words?</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Witwoud</td>
							<td>Ay; but I like him for that now: for his want of words gives me the pleasure very often to explain his meaning.</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Fainall</td>
							<td>He’s impudent?</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Witwoud</td>
							<td>No that’s not it.</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Mirabell</td>
							<td>Vain?</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Witwoud</td>
							<td>No.</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Mirabell</td>
							<td>What! He speaks unseasonable truths sometimes, because he has not wit enough to invent an evasion?</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Witwoud</td>
							<td>Truths? Ha, ha, ha! No, no, since you will have it⁠—I mean he never speaks truth at all⁠—that’s all. He will lie like a chambermaid, or a woman of quality’s porter. Now that is a fault.</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td/>
							<td>
								<i epub:type="z3998:stage-direction">Enter <b epub:type="z3998:persona">Coachman</b>.</i>
							</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Coachman</td>
							<td>Is Master Petulant here, mistress?</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Betty</td>
							<td>Yes.</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Coachman</td>
							<td>Three gentlewomen in a coach would speak with him.</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Fainall</td>
							<td>O brave Petulant! Three!</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Betty</td>
							<td>I’ll tell him.</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Coachman</td>
							<td>You must bring two dishes of chocolate and a glass of cinnamon water.<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-18" id="noteref-18" epub:type="noteref">18</a></td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td/>
							<td>
								<i class="editorial" epub:type="z3998:stage-direction">Exeunt <b epub:type="z3998:persona">Betty</b> and <b epub:type="z3998:persona">Coachman</b>.</i>
							</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Witwoud</td>
							<td>That should be for two fasting strumpets, and a bawd troubled with wind. Now you may know what the three are.</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Mirabell</td>
							<td>You are very free with your friend’s acquaintance.</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Witwoud</td>
							<td>Ay, ay, friendship without freedom is as dull as love without enjoyment or wine without toasting: but to tell you a secret, these are trulls whom he allows coach-hire, and something more by the week, to call on him once a day at public places.</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Mirabell</td>
							<td>How!</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Witwoud</td>
							<td>You shall see he won’t go to ’em because there’s no more company here to take notice of him. Why, this is nothing to what he used to do:⁠—before he found out this way, I have known him call for himself⁠—</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Fainall</td>
							<td>Call for himself? What dost thou mean?</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Witwoud</td>
							<td>Mean! Why he would slip you out of this chocolate-house,<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-19" id="noteref-19" epub:type="noteref">19</a> just when you had been talking to him. As soon as your back was turned⁠—whip he was gone; then trip to his lodging, clap on a hood and scarf and a mask, slap into a hackney-coach, and drive hither to the door again in a trice; where he would send in for himself; that I mean, call for himself, wait for himself, nay, and what’s more, not finding himself, sometimes leave a letter for himself.</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Mirabell</td>
							<td>I confess this is something extraordinary. I believe he waits for himself now, he is so long a coming; oh, I ask his pardon.</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td/>
							<td>
								<i class="editorial" epub:type="z3998:stage-direction">Enter <b epub:type="z3998:persona">Petulant</b> and <b epub:type="z3998:persona">Betty</b>.</i>
							</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Betty</td>
							<td>Sir, the coach stays.</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Petulant</td>
							<td>Well, well, I come. ’Sbud, a man had as good be a professed midwife as a professed whoremaster, at this rate! To be knocked up and raised at all hours, and in all places. Pox on ’em, I won’t come.⁠—D’ye hear, tell ’em I won’t come.⁠—Let ’em snivel and cry their hearts out.</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Fainall</td>
							<td>You are very cruel, Petulant.</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Petulant</td>
							<td>All’s one, let it pass. I have a humour to be cruel.</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Mirabell</td>
							<td>I hope they are not persons of condition that you use at this rate.</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Petulant</td>
							<td>Condition? Condition’s a dried fig, if I am not in humour. By this hand, if they were your⁠—a⁠—a⁠—your what-d’ye-call-’ems themselves, they must wait or rub off, if I want appetite.</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Mirabell</td>
							<td>What-d’ye-call-’ems! What are they, Witwoud?</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Witwoud</td>
							<td>Empresses, my dear. By your what-d’ye-call-’ems he means sultana queens.</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Petulant</td>
							<td>Ay, Roxolanas.</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Mirabell</td>
							<td>Cry you mercy.</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Fainall</td>
							<td>Witwoud says they are⁠—</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Petulant</td>
							<td>What does he say th’are?</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Witwoud</td>
							<td>I? Fine ladies, I say.</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Petulant</td>
							<td>Pass on, Witwoud. Harkee, by this light, his relations: two co-heiresses his cousins, and an old aunt, who loves caterwauling better than a conventicle.</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Witwoud</td>
							<td>Ha, ha, ha! I had a mind to see how the rogue would come off. Ha, ha, ha! Gad, I can’t be angry with him, if he had said they were my mother and my sisters.</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Mirabell</td>
							<td>No?</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Witwoud</td>
							<td>No; the rogue’s wit and readiness of invention charm me, dear Petulant.</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Betty</td>
							<td>They are gone, sir, in great anger.</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Petulant</td>
							<td>Enough, let ’em trundle. Anger helps complexion, saves paint.</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Fainall</td>
							<td>This continence is all dissembled; this is in order to have something to brag of the next time he makes court to Millamant, and swear he has abandoned the whole sex for her sake.</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Mirabell</td>
							<td>Have you not left off your impudent pretensions there yet? I shall cut your throat, sometime or other, Petulant, about that business.</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Petulant</td>
							<td>Ay, ay, let that pass. There are other throats to be cut.</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Mirabell</td>
							<td>Meaning mine, sir?</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Petulant</td>
							<td>Not I⁠—I mean nobody⁠—I know nothing. But there are uncles and nephews in the world⁠—and they may be rivals. What then? All’s one for that.</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Mirabell</td>
							<td>How? Harkee, Petulant, come hither⁠—explain, or I shall call your interpreter.</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Petulant</td>
							<td>Explain? I know nothing. Why, you have an uncle, have you not, lately come to town, and lodges by my Lady Wishfort’s?</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Mirabell</td>
							<td>True.</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Petulant</td>
							<td>Why, that’s enough⁠—you and he are not friends; and if he should marry and have a child, yon may be disinherited, ha?</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Mirabell</td>
							<td>Where hast thou stumbled upon all this truth?</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Petulant</td>
							<td>All’s one for that; why, then, say I know something.</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Mirabell</td>
							<td>Come, thou art an honest fellow, Petulant, and shalt make love to my mistress, thou shalt, faith. What hast thou heard of my uncle?</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Petulant</td>
							<td>I? Nothing, I. If throats are to be cut, let swords clash. Snug’s the word; I shrug and am silent.</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Mirabell</td>
							<td>Oh, raillery, raillery! Come, I know thou art in the women’s secrets.⁠—What, you’re a cabalist; I know you stayed at Millamant’s last night after I went. Was there any mention made of my uncle or me? Tell me; if thou hadst but good nature equal to thy wit, Petulant, Tony Witwoud, who is now thy competitor in fame, would show as dim by thee as a dead whiting’s eye by a pearl of orient; he would no more be seen by thee than Mercury is by the sun: come, I’m sure thou wo’t tell me.<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-20" id="noteref-20" epub:type="noteref">20</a></td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Petulant</td>
							<td>If I do, will you grant me common sense, then, for the future?</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Mirabell</td>
							<td>Faith, I’ll do what I can for thee, and I’ll pray that Heavan may grant it thee in the meantime.</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Petulant</td>
							<td>Well, hark’ee.</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td/>
							<td>
								<i class="editorial" epub:type="z3998:stage-direction"><b epub:type="z3998:persona">Mirabell</b> and <b epub:type="z3998:persona">Petulant</b> talk apart.</i>
							</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Fainall</td>
							<td>Petulant and you both will find Mirabell as warm a rival as a lover.</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Witwoud</td>
							<td>Pshaw, pshaw, that she laughs at Petulant is plain. And for my part, but that it is almost a fashion to admire her, I should⁠—hark’ee⁠—to tell you a secret, but let it go no further between friends, I shall never break my heart for her.</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Fainall</td>
							<td>How!</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Witwoud</td>
							<td>She’s handsome; but she’s a sort of an uncertain woman.</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Fainall</td>
							<td>I thought you had died for her.</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Witwoud</td>
							<td>Umh⁠—no⁠—</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Fainall</td>
							<td>She has wit.</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Witwoud</td>
							<td>’Tis what she will hardly allow anybody else. Now, demme, I should hate that, if she were as handsome as Cleopatra. Mirabell is not so sure of her as he thinks for.</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Fainall</td>
							<td>Why do you think so?</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Witwoud</td>
							<td>We stayed pretty late there last night, and heard something of an uncle to Mirabell, who is lately come to town, and is between him and the best part of his estate. Mirabell and he are at some distance, as my Lady Wishfort has been told; and you know she hates Mirabell worse than a quaker hates a parrot,<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-21" id="noteref-21" epub:type="noteref">21</a> or than a fishmonger hates a hard frost.<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-22" id="noteref-22" epub:type="noteref">22</a> Whether this uncle has seen <abbr>Mrs.</abbr> Millamant or not, I cannot say; but there were items of such a treaty being in embryo; and if it should come to life, poor Mirabell would be in some sort unfortunately fobbed, i’faith.</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Fainall</td>
							<td>’Tis impossible Millamant should hearken to it.</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Witwoud</td>
							<td>Faith, my dear, I can’t tell; she’s a woman and a kind of a humorist.</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Mirabell</td>
							<td>And this is the sum of what you could collect last night?</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Petulant</td>
							<td>The quintessence. Maybe Witwoud knows more; he stayed longer. Besides, they never mind him; they say anything before him.</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Mirabell</td>
							<td>I thought you had been the greatest favourite.</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Petulant</td>
							<td>Ay, tête-à-tête; but not in public, because I make remarks.</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Mirabell</td>
							<td>You do?</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Petulant</td>
							<td>Ay, ay, pox, I’m malicious, man. Now he’s soft, you know, they are not in awe of him⁠—the fellow’s well bred, he’s what you call a⁠—what d’ye-call-’em⁠—a fine gentleman, but he’s silly withal.</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Mirabell</td>
							<td>I thank you, I know as much as my curiosity requires. Fainall, are you for the Mall?<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-23" id="noteref-23" epub:type="noteref">23</a></td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Fainall</td>
							<td>Ay, I’ll take a turn before dinner.</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Witwoud</td>
							<td>Ay, we’ll all walk in the park; the ladies talked of being there.</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Mirabell</td>
							<td>I thought you were obliged to watch for your brother Sir Wilfull’s arrival.</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Witwoud</td>
							<td>No, no, he comes to his aunt’s, my Lady Wishfort; pox on him, I shall be troubled with him too; what shall I do with the fool?</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Petulant</td>
							<td>Beg him for his estate, that I may beg you afterwards, and so have but one trouble with you both.</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Witwoud</td>
							<td>O rare Petulant! Thou art as quick as fire in a frosty morning; thou shalt to the Mall with us, and we’ll be very severe.</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Petulant</td>
							<td>Enough; I’m in a humour to be severe.</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Mirabell</td>
							<td>Are you? Pray then walk by yourselves. Let not us be accessory to your putting the ladies out of countenance with your senseless ribaldry, which you roar out aloud as often as they pass by you, and when you have made a handsome woman blush, then you think you have been severe.</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Petulant</td>
							<td>What, what! Then let ’em either show their innocence by not understanding what they hear, or else show their discretion by not hearing what they would not be thought to understand.</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Mirabell</td>
							<td>But hast not thou then sense enough to know that thou ought’st to be most ashamed thyself when thou hast put another out of countenance?</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Petulant</td>
							<td>Not I, by this hand⁠—I always take blushing either for a sign of guilt or ill-breeding.</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Mirabell</td>
							<td>I confess you ought to think so. You are in the right, that you may plead the error of your judgment in defence of your practice.</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td/>
							<td>
								<blockquote epub:type="z3998:verse">
									<p>
										<span>Where modesty’s ill manners, ’tis but fit</span>
										<br/>
										<span>That impudence and malice pass for wit.</span>
									</p>
								</blockquote>
							</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td/>
							<td>
								<i class="editorial" epub:type="z3998:stage-direction">Exeunt.</i>
							</td>
						</tr>
					</tbody>
				</table>
			</section>
		</section>
	</body>
</html>
