
<blockquote><p><i>Audire est operæ pretium</i>,
<i>procedere recte</i><br/>
<i>Qui mæchis non vultis</i>.—<span class="smcap">Hor</span>. <i>Sat.</i> i. 2, 37.</p>
<p>—<i>Metuat doti deprensa</i>.—<i>Ibid</i>.</p>
</blockquote>


<h2><span class="GutSmall">TO THE RIGHT HONOURABLE</span><br/>
RALPH, EARL OF MOUNTAGUE, <span class="GutSmall">ETC.</span></h2>
<p><span class="smcap">My Lord</span>,—Whether the world
will arraign me of vanity or not, that I have presumed to
dedicate this comedy to your lordship, I am yet in doubt; though,
it may be, it is some degree of vanity even to doubt of it. 
One who has at any time had the honour of your lordship’s
conversation, cannot be supposed to think very meanly of that
which he would prefer to your perusal.  Yet it were to incur
the imputation of too much sufficiency to pretend to such a merit
as might abide the test of your lordship’s censure.</p>
<p>Whatever value may be wanting to this play while yet it is
mine, will be sufficiently made up to it when it is once become
your lordship’s; and it is my security, that I cannot have
overrated it more by my dedication than your lordship will
dignify it by your patronage.</p>
<p>That it succeeded on the stage was almost beyond my
expectation; for but little of it was prepared for that general
taste which seems now to be predominant in the palates of our
audience.</p>
<p>Those characters which are meant to be ridiculed in most of
our comedies are of fools so gross, that in my humble opinion
they should rather disturb than divert the well-natured and
reflecting part of an audience; they are rather objects of
charity than contempt, and instead of moving our mirth, they
ought very often to excite our compassion.</p>
<p>This reflection moved me to design some characters which
should appear ridiculous not so much through a natural folly
(which is incorrigible, and therefore not proper for the stage)
as through an affected wit: a wit which, at the same time that it
is affected, is also false.  As there is some difficulty in
the formation of a character of this nature, so there is some
hazard which attends the progress of its success upon the stage:
for many come to a play so overcharged with criticism, that they
very often let fly their censure, when through their rashness
they have mistaken their aim.  This I had occasion lately to
observe: for this play had been acted two or three days before
some of these hasty judges could find the leisure to distinguish
betwixt the character of a Witwoud and a Truewit.</p>
<p>I must beg your lordship’s pardon for this digression
from the true course of this epistle; but that it may not seem
altogether impertinent, I beg that I may plead the occasion of
it, in part of that excuse of which I stand in need, for
recommending this comedy to your protection.  It is only by
the countenance of your lordship, and the <i>few</i> so
qualified, that such who write with care and pains can hope to be
distinguished: for the prostituted name of poet promiscuously
levels all that bear it.</p>
<p>Terence, the most correct writer in the world, had a Scipio
and a Lelius, if not to assist him, at least to support him in
his reputation.  And notwithstanding his extraordinary
merit, it may be their countenance was not more than
necessary.</p>
<p>The purity of his style, the delicacy of his turns, and the
justness of his characters, were all of them beauties which the
greater part of his audience were incapable of tasting. 
Some of the coarsest strokes of Plautus, so severely censured by
Horace, were more likely to affect the multitude; such, who come
with expectation to laugh at the last act of a play, and are
better entertained with two or three unseasonable jests than with
the artful solution of the fable.</p>
<p>As Terence excelled in his performances, so had he great
advantages to encourage his undertakings, for he built most on
the foundations of Menander: his plots were generally modelled,
and his characters ready drawn to his hand.  He copied
Menander; and Menander had no less light in the formation of his
characters from the observations of Theophrastus, of whom he was
a disciple; and Theophrastus, it is known, was not only the
disciple, but the immediate successor of Aristotle, the first and
greatest judge of poetry.  These were great models to design
by; and the further advantage which Terence possessed towards
giving his plays the due ornaments of purity of style, and
justness of manners, was not less considerable from the freedom
of conversation which was permitted him with Lelius and Scipio,
two of the greatest and most polite men of his age.  And,
indeed, the privilege of such a conversation is the only certain
means of attaining to the perfection of dialogue.</p>
<p>If it has happened in any part of this comedy that I have
gained a turn of style or expression more correct, or at least
more corrigible, than in those which I have formerly written, I
must, with equal pride and gratitude, ascribe it to the honour of
your lordship’s admitting me into your conversation, and
that of a society where everybody else was so well worthy of you,
in your retirement last summer from the town: for it was
immediately after, that this comedy was written.  If I have
failed in my performance, it is only to be regretted, where there
were so many not inferior either to a Scipio or a Lelius, that
there should be one wanting equal in capacity to a Terence.</p>
<p>If I am not mistaken, poetry is almost the only art which has
not yet laid claim to your lordship’s patronage. 
Architecture and painting, to the great honour of our country,
have flourished under your influence and protection.  In the
meantime, poetry, the eldest sister of all arts, and parent of
most, seems to have resigned her birthright, by having neglected
to pay her duty to your lordship, and by permitting others of a
later extraction to prepossess that place in your esteem, to
which none can pretend a better title.  Poetry, in its
nature, is sacred to the good and great: the relation between
them is reciprocal, and they are ever propitious to it.  It
is the privilege of poetry to address them, and it is their
prerogative alone to give it protection.</p>
<p>This received maxim is a general apology for all writers who
consecrate their labours to great men: but I could wish, at this
time, that this address were exempted from the common pretence of
all dedications; and that as I can distinguish your lordship even
among the most deserving, so this offering might become
remarkable by some particular instance of respect, which should
assure your lordship that I am, with all due sense of your
extreme worthiness and humanity, my lord, your lordship’s
most obedient and most obliged humble servant,</p>
<p style="text-align: right">WILL. CONGREVE.</p>
<h2>PROLOGUE.</h2>
<p style="text-align: center">Spoken by <span class="smcap">Mr.
Betterton</span>.</p>
<p class="poetry"><span class="smcap">Of</span> those few fools,
who with ill stars are curst,<br/>
Sure scribbling fools, called poets, fare the worst:<br/>
For they’re a sort of fools which fortune makes,<br/>
And, after she has made ’em fools, forsakes.<br/>
With Nature’s oafs ’tis quite a diff’rent
case,<br/>
For Fortune favours all her idiot race.<br/>
In her own nest the cuckoo eggs we find,<br/>
O’er which she broods to hatch the changeling kind:<br/>
No portion for her own she has to spare,<br/>
So much she dotes on her adopted care.</p>
<p class="poetry">Poets are bubbles, by the town drawn in,<br/>
Suffered at first some trifling stakes to win:<br/>
But what unequal hazards do they run!<br/>
Each time they write they venture all they’ve won:<br/>
The Squire that’s buttered still, is sure to be undone.<br/>
This author, heretofore, has found your favour,<br/>
But pleads no merit from his past behaviour.<br/>
To build on that might prove a vain presumption,<br/>
Should grants to poets made admit resumption,<br/>
And in Parnassus he must lose his seat,<br/>
If that be found a forfeited estate.</p>
<p class="poetry">He owns, with toil he wrought the following
scenes,<br/>
But if they’re naught ne’er spare him for his
pains:<br/>
Damn him the more; have no commiseration<br/>
For dulness on mature deliberation.<br/>
He swears he’ll not resent one hissed-off scene,<br/>
Nor, like those peevish wits, his play maintain,<br/>
Who, to assert their sense, your taste arraign.<br/>
Some plot we think he has, and some new thought;<br/>
Some humour too, no farce—but that’s a fault.<br/>
Satire, he thinks, you ought not to expect;<br/>
For so reformed a town who dares correct?<br/>
To please, this time, has been his sole pretence,<br/>
He’ll not instruct, lest it should give offence.<br/>
Should he by chance a knave or fool expose,<br/>
That hurts none here, sure here are none of those.<br/>
In short, our play shall (with your leave to show it)<br/>
Give you one instance of a passive poet,<br/>
Who to your judgments yields all resignation:<br/>
So save or damn, after your own discretion.</p>
<h2>DRAMATIS PERSONÆ.</h2>
<table>
<tr>
<td colspan="2"><p style="text-align: center">MEN.</p>
</td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td><p><span class="smcap">Fainall</span>, in love with Mrs.
Marwood,</p>
</td>
<td><p><i>Mr. Betterton</i>.</p>
</td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td><p><span class="smcap">Mirabell</span>, in love with Mrs.
Millamant,</p>
</td>
<td><p><i>Mr. Verbruggen</i>.</p>
</td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td><p><span class="smcap">Witwoud</span>, follower of Mrs.
Millamant,</p>
</td>
<td><p><i>Mr. Bowen</i>.</p>
</td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td><p><span class="smcap">Petulant</span>, follower of Mrs.
Millamant,</p>
</td>
<td><p><i>Mr. Bowman</i>.</p>
</td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td><p><span class="smcap">Sir Wilfull Witwoud</span>, half
brother to Witwoud, and nephew to Lady Wishfort,</p>
</td>
<td><p><i>Mr. Underhill</i>.</p>
</td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td><p><span class="smcap">Waitwell</span>, servant to
Mirabell,</p>
</td>
<td><p><i>Mr. Bright</i>.</p>
</td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td colspan="2"><p style="text-align: center">WOMEN.</p>
</td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td><p><span class="smcap">Lady Wishfort</span>, enemy to
Mirabell, for having falsely pretended love to her,</p>
</td>
<td><p><i>Mrs. Leigh</i>.</p>
</td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td><p><span class="smcap">Mrs. Millamant</span>, a fine lady,
niece to Lady Wishfort, and loves Mirabell,</p>
</td>
<td><p><i>Mrs. Bracegirdle</i>.</p>
</td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td><p><span class="smcap">Mrs. Marwood</span>, friend to Mr.
Fainall, and likes Mirabell,</p>
</td>
<td><p><i>Mrs. Barry</i>.</p>
</td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td><p><span class="smcap">Mrs. Fainall</span>, daughter to Lady
Wishfort, and wife to Fainall, formerly friend to Mirabell,</p>
</td>
<td><p><i>Mrs. Bowman</i>.</p>
</td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td><p><span class="smcap">Foible</span>, woman to Lady
Wishfort,</p>
</td>
<td><p><i>Mrs. Willis</i>.</p>
</td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td><p><span class="smcap">Mincing</span>, woman to Mrs.
Millamant,</p>
</td>
<td><p><i>Mrs. Prince</i>.</p>
</td>
</tr>
</table>
<p style="text-align: center"><span class="smcap">Dancers</span>,
<span class="smcap">Footmen</span>, <span class="smcap">Attendants</span>.</p>
<p style="text-align: center"><span class="smcap">Scene</span>:
London.</p>
<p style="text-align: center"><i>The time equal to that of the
presentation</i>.</p>
<h2>ACT I.—SCENE I.</h2>
<p style="text-align: center"><i>A Chocolate-house</i>.</p>
<p style="text-align: center"><span class="smcap">Mirabell</span>
<i>and</i> <span class="smcap">Fainall</span> <i>rising from
cards</i>.  <span class="smcap">Betty</span>
<i>waiting</i>.</p>
<p>MIRA.  You are a fortunate man, Mr. Fainall.</p>
<p>FAIN.  Have we done?</p>
<p>MIRA.  What you please.  I’ll play on to
entertain you.</p>
<p>FAIN.  No, I’ll give you your revenge another time,
when you are not so indifferent; you are thinking of something
else now, and play too negligently: the coldness of a losing
gamester lessens the pleasure of the winner.  I’d no
more play with a man that slighted his ill fortune than I’d
make love to a woman who undervalued the loss of her
reputation.</p>
<p>MIRA.  You have a taste extremely delicate, and are for
refining on your pleasures.</p>
<p>FAIN.  Prithee, why so reserved?  Something has put
you out of humour.</p>
<p>MIRA.  Not at all: I happen to be grave to-day, and you
are gay; that’s all.</p>
<p>FAIN.  Confess, Millamant and you quarrelled last night,
after I left you; my fair cousin has some humours that would
tempt the patience of a Stoic.  What, some coxcomb came in,
and was well received by her, while you were by?</p>
<p>MIRA.  Witwoud and Petulant, and what was worse, her
aunt, your wife’s mother, my evil genius—or to sum up
all in her own name, my old Lady Wishfort came in.</p>
<p>FAIN.  Oh, there it is then: she has a lasting passion
for you, and with reason.—What, then my wife was there?</p>
<p>MIRA.  Yes, and Mrs. Marwood and three or four more, whom
I never saw before; seeing me, they all put on their grave faces,
whispered one another, then complained aloud of the vapours, and
after fell into a profound silence.</p>
<p>FAIN.  They had a mind to be rid of you.</p>
<p>MIRA.  For which reason I resolved not to stir.  At
last the good old lady broke through her painful taciturnity with
an invective against long visits.  I would not have
understood her, but Millamant joining in the argument, I rose and
with a constrained smile told her, I thought nothing was so easy
as to know when a visit began to be troublesome; she reddened and
I withdrew, without expecting her reply.</p>
<p>FAIN.  You were to blame to resent what she spoke only in
compliance with her aunt.</p>
<p>MIRA.  She is more mistress of herself than to be under
the necessity of such a resignation.</p>
<p>FAIN.  What? though half her fortune depends upon her
marrying with my lady’s approbation?</p>
<p>MIRA.  I was then in such a humour, that I should have
been better pleased if she had been less discreet.</p>
<p>FAIN.  Now I remember, I wonder not they were weary of
you; last night was one of their cabal-nights: they have
’em three times a week and meet by turns at one
another’s apartments, where they come together like the
coroner’s inquest, to sit upon the murdered reputations of
the week.  You and I are excluded, and it was once proposed
that all the male sex should be excepted; but somebody moved that
to avoid scandal there might be one man of the community, upon
which motion Witwoud and Petulant were enrolled members.</p>
<p>MIRA.  And who may have been the foundress of this
sect?  My Lady Wishfort, I warrant, who publishes her
detestation of mankind, and full of the vigour of fifty-five,
declares for a friend and ratafia; and let posterity shift for
itself, she’ll breed no more.</p>
<p>FAIN.  The discovery of your sham addresses to her, to
conceal your love to her niece, has provoked this
separation.  Had you dissembled better, things might have
continued in the state of nature.</p>
<p>MIRA.  I did as much as man could, with any reasonable
conscience; I proceeded to the very last act of flattery with
her, and was guilty of a song in her commendation.  Nay, I
got a friend to put her into a lampoon, and compliment her with
the imputation of an affair with a young fellow, which I carried
so far, that I told her the malicious town took notice that she
was grown fat of a sudden; and when she lay in of a dropsy,
persuaded her she was reported to be in labour.  The
devil’s in’t, if an old woman is to be flattered
further, unless a man should endeavour downright personally to
debauch her: and that my virtue forbade me.  But for the
discovery of this amour, I am indebted to your friend, or your
wife’s friend, Mrs. Marwood.</p>
<p>FAIN.  What should provoke her to be your enemy, unless
she has made you advances which you have slighted?  Women do
not easily forgive omissions of that nature.</p>
<p>MIRA.  She was always civil to me, till of late.  I
confess I am not one of those coxcombs who are apt to interpret a
woman’s good manners to her prejudice, and think that she
who does not refuse ’em everything can refuse ’em
nothing.</p>
<p>FAIN.  You are a gallant man, Mirabell; and though you
may have cruelty enough not to satisfy a lady’s longing,
you have too much generosity not to be tender of her
honour.  Yet you speak with an indifference which seems to
be affected, and confesses you are conscious of a negligence.</p>
<p>MIRA.  You pursue the argument with a distrust that seems
to be unaffected, and confesses you are conscious of a concern
for which the lady is more indebted to you than is your wife.</p>
<p>FAIN.  Fie, fie, friend, if you grow censorious I must
leave you:—I’ll look upon the gamesters in the next
room.</p>
<p>MIRA.  Who are they?</p>
<p>FAIN.  Petulant and Witwoud.—Bring me some
chocolate.</p>
<p>MIRA.  Betty, what says your clock?</p>
<p>BET.  Turned of the last canonical hour, sir.</p>
<p>MIRA.  How pertinently the jade answers me!  Ha!
almost one a’ clock!  [<i>Looking on his
watch</i>.]  Oh, y’are come!</p>
<h3>SCENE II.</h3>
<p style="text-align: center"><span class="smcap">Mirabell</span>
<i>and</i> <span class="smcap">Footman</span>.</p>
<p>MIRA.  Well, is the grand affair over?  You have
been something tedious.</p>
<p>SERV.  Sir, there’s such coupling at Pancras that
they stand behind one another, as ’twere in a
country-dance.  Ours was the last couple to lead up; and no
hopes appearing of dispatch, besides, the parson growing hoarse,
we were afraid his lungs would have failed before it came to our
turn; so we drove round to Duke’s Place, and there they
were riveted in a trice.</p>
<p>MIRA.  So, so; you are sure they are married?</p>
<p>SERV.  Married and bedded, sir; I am witness.</p>
<p>MIRA.  Have you the certificate?</p>
<p>SERV.  Here it is, sir.</p>
<p>MIRA.  Has the tailor brought Waitwell’s clothes
home, and the new liveries?</p>
<p>SERV.  Yes, sir.</p>
<p>MIRA.  That’s well.  Do you go home again,
d’ye hear, and adjourn the consummation till farther order;
bid Waitwell shake his ears, and Dame Partlet rustle up her
feathers, and meet me at one a’ clock by Rosamond’s
pond, that I may see her before she returns to her lady. 
And, as you tender your ears, be secret.</p>
<h3>SCENE III.</h3>
<p style="text-align: center"><span class="smcap">Mirabell</span>, <span class="smcap">Fainall</span>, <span class="smcap">Betty</span>.</p>
<p>FAIN.  Joy of your success, Mirabell; you look
pleased.</p>
<p>MIRA.  Ay; I have been engaged in a matter of some sort
of mirth, which is not yet ripe for discovery.  I am glad
this is not a cabal-night.  I wonder, Fainall, that you who
are married, and of consequence should be discreet, will suffer
your wife to be of such a party.</p>
<p>FAIN.  Faith, I am not jealous.  Besides, most who
are engaged are women and relations; and for the men, they are of
a kind too contemptible to give scandal.</p>
<p>MIRA.  I am of another opinion: the greater the coxcomb,
always the more the scandal; for a woman who is not a fool can
have but one reason for associating with a man who is one.</p>
<p>FAIN.  Are you jealous as often as you see Witwoud
entertained by Millamant?</p>
<p>MIRA.  Of her understanding I am, if not of her
person.</p>
<p>FAIN.  You do her wrong; for, to give her her due, she
has wit.</p>
<p>MIRA.  She has beauty enough to make any man think so,
and complaisance enough not to contradict him who shall tell her
so.</p>
<p>FAIN.  For a passionate lover methinks you are a man
somewhat too discerning in the failings of your mistress.</p>
<p>MIRA.  And for a discerning man somewhat too passionate a
lover, for I like her with all her faults; nay, like her for her
faults.  Her follies are so natural, or so artful, that they
become her, and those affectations which in another woman would
be odious serve but to make her more agreeable.  I’ll
tell thee, Fainall, she once used me with that insolence that in
revenge I took her to pieces, sifted her, and separated her
failings: I studied ’em and got ’em by rote. 
The catalogue was so large that I was not without hopes, one day
or other, to hate her heartily.  To which end I so used
myself to think of ’em, that at length, contrary to my
design and expectation, they gave me every hour less and less
disturbance, till in a few days it became habitual to me to
remember ’em without being displeased.  They are now
grown as familiar to me as my own frailties, and in all
probability in a little time longer I shall like ’em as
well.</p>
<p>FAIN.  Marry her, marry her; be half as well acquainted
with her charms as you are with her defects, and, my life
on’t, you are your own man again.</p>
<p>MIRA.  Say you so?</p>
<p>FAIN.  Ay, ay; I have experience.  I have a wife,
and so forth.</p>
<h3>SCENE IV.</h3>
<p style="text-align: center">[<i>To them</i>] <span class="smcap">Messenger</span>.</p>
<p>MESS.  Is one Squire Witwoud here?</p>
<p>BET.  Yes; what’s your business?</p>
<p>MESS.  I have a letter for him, from his brother Sir
Wilfull, which I am charged to deliver into his own hands.</p>
<p>BET.  He’s in the next room, friend.  That
way.</p>
<h3>SCENE V.</h3>
<p style="text-align: center"><span class="smcap">Mirabell</span>, <span class="smcap">Fainall</span>, <span class="smcap">Betty</span>.</p>
<p>MIRA.  What, is the chief of that noble family in town,
Sir Wilfull Witwoud?</p>
<p>FAIN.  He is expected to-day.  Do you know him?</p>
<p>MIRA.  I have seen him; he promises to be an
extraordinary person.  I think you have the honour to be
related to him.</p>
<p>FAIN.  Yes; he is half-brother to this Witwoud by a
former wife, who was sister to my Lady Wishfort, my wife’s
mother.  If you marry Millamant, you must call cousins
too.</p>
<p>MIRA.  I had rather be his relation than his
acquaintance.</p>
<p>FAIN.  He comes to town in order to equip himself for
travel.</p>
<p>MIRA.  For travel!  Why the man that I mean is above
forty.</p>
<p>FAIN.  No matter for that; ’tis for the honour of
England that all Europe should know we have blockheads of all
ages.</p>
<p>MIRA.  I wonder there is not an act of parliament to save
the credit of the nation and prohibit the exportation of
fools.</p>
<p>FAIN.  By no means, ’tis better as ’tis;
’tis better to trade with a little loss, than to be quite
eaten up with being overstocked.</p>
<p>MIRA.  Pray, are the follies of this knight-errant and
those of the squire, his brother, anything related?</p>
<p>FAIN.  Not at all: Witwoud grows by the knight like a
medlar grafted on a crab.  One will melt in your mouth and
t’other set your teeth on edge; one is all pulp and the
other all core.</p>
<p>MIRA.  So one will be rotten before he be ripe, and the
other will be rotten without ever being ripe at all.</p>
<p>FAIN.  Sir Wilfull is an odd mixture of bashfulness and
obstinacy.  But when he’s drunk, he’s as loving
as the monster in The Tempest, and much after the same
manner.  To give bother his due, he has something of
good-nature, and does not always want wit.</p>
<p>MIRA.  Not always: but as often as his memory fails him
and his commonplace of comparisons.  He is a fool with a
good memory and some few scraps of other folks’ wit. 
He is one whose conversation can never be approved, yet it is now
and then to be endured.  He has indeed one good quality: he
is not exceptious, for he so passionately affects the reputation
of understanding raillery that he will construe an affront into a
jest, and call downright rudeness and ill language satire and
fire.</p>
<p>FAIN.  If you have a mind to finish his picture, you have
an opportunity to do it at full length.  Behold the
original.</p>
<h3>SCENE VI.</h3>
<p style="text-align: center">[<i>To them</i>] <span class="smcap">Witwoud</span>.</p>
<p>WIT.  Afford me your compassion, my dears; pity me,
Fainall, Mirabell, pity me.</p>
<p>MIRA.  I do from my soul.</p>
<p>FAIN.  Why, what’s the matter?</p>
<p>WIT.  No letters for me, Betty?</p>
<p>BET.  Did not a messenger bring you one but now, sir?</p>
<p>WIT.  Ay; but no other?</p>
<p>BET.  No, sir.</p>
<p>WIT.  That’s hard, that’s very hard.  A
messenger, a mule, a beast of burden, he has brought me a letter
from the fool my brother, as heavy as a panegyric in a funeral
sermon, or a copy of commendatory verses from one poet to
another.  And what’s worse, ’tis as sure a
forerunner of the author as an epistle dedicatory.</p>
<p>MIRA.  A fool, and your brother, Witwoud?</p>
<p>WIT.  Ay, ay, my half-brother.  My half-brother he
is, no nearer, upon honour.</p>
<p>MIRA.  Then ’tis possible he may be but half a
fool.</p>
<p>WIT.  Good, good, Mirabell, <i>le drôle</i>! 
Good, good, hang him, don’t let’s talk of
him.—Fainall, how does your lady?  Gad, I say anything
in the world to get this fellow out of my head.  I beg
pardon that I should ask a man of pleasure and the town a
question at once so foreign and domestic.  But I talk like
an old maid at a marriage, I don’t know what I say: but
she’s the best woman in the world.</p>
<p>FAIN.  ’Tis well you don’t know what you say,
or else your commendation would go near to make me either vain or
jealous.</p>
<p>WIT.  No man in town lives well with a wife but
Fainall.  Your judgment, Mirabell?</p>
<p>MIRA.  You had better step and ask his wife, if you would
be credibly informed.</p>
<p>WIT.  Mirabell!</p>
<p>MIRA.  Ay.</p>
<p>WIT.  My dear, I ask ten thousand pardons.  Gad, I
have forgot what I was going to say to you.</p>
<p>MIRA.  I thank you heartily, heartily.</p>
<p>WIT.  No, but prithee excuse me:—my memory is such
a memory.</p>
<p>MIRA.  Have a care of such apologies, Witwoud; for I
never knew a fool but he affected to complain either of the
spleen or his memory.</p>
<p>FAIN.  What have you done with Petulant?</p>
<p>WIT.  He’s reckoning his money; my money it was: I
have no luck to-day.</p>
<p>FAIN.  You may allow him to win of you at play, for you
are sure to be too hard for him at repartee: since you monopolise
the wit that is between you, the fortune must be his of
course.</p>
<p>MIRA.  I don’t find that Petulant confesses the
superiority of wit to be your talent, Witwoud.</p>
<p>WIT.  Come, come, you are malicious now, and would breed
debates.  Petulant’s my friend, and a very honest
fellow, and a very pretty fellow, and has a
smattering—faith and troth, a pretty deal of an odd sort of
a small wit: nay, I’ll do him justice.  I’m his
friend, I won’t wrong him.  And if he had any judgment
in the world, he would not be altogether contemptible. 
Come, come, don’t detract from the merits of my friend.</p>
<p>FAIN.  You don’t take your friend to be over-nicely
bred?</p>
<p>WIT.  No, no, hang him, the rogue has no manners at all,
that I must own; no more breeding than a bum-baily, that I grant
you:—’tis pity; the fellow has fire and life.</p>
<p>MIRA.  What, courage?</p>
<p>WIT.  Hum, faith, I don’t know as to that, I
can’t say as to that.  Yes, faith, in a controversy
he’ll contradict anybody.</p>
<p>MIRA.  Though ’twere a man whom he feared or a
woman whom he loved.</p>
<p>WIT.  Well, well, he does not always think before he
speaks.  We have all our failings; you are too hard upon
him, you are, faith.  Let me excuse him,—I can defend
most of his faults, except one or two; one he has, that’s
the truth on’t,—if he were my brother I could not
acquit him—that indeed I could wish were otherwise.</p>
<p>MIRA.  Ay, marry, what’s that, Witwoud?</p>
<p>WIT.  Oh, pardon me.  Expose the infirmities of my
friend?  No, my dear, excuse me there.</p>
<p>FAIN.  What, I warrant he’s unsincere, or
’tis some such trifle.</p>
<p>WIT.  No, no; what if he be?  ’Tis no matter
for that, his wit will excuse that.  A wit should no more be
sincere than a woman constant: one argues a decay of parts, as
t’other of beauty.</p>
<p>MIRA.  Maybe you think him too positive?</p>
<p>WIT.  No, no; his being positive is an incentive to
argument, and keeps up conversation.</p>
<p>FAIN.  Too illiterate?</p>
<p>WIT.  That?  That’s his happiness.  His
want of learning gives him the more opportunities to show his
natural parts.</p>
<p>MIRA.  He wants words?</p>
<p>WIT.  Ay; but I like him for that now: for his want of
words gives me the pleasure very often to explain his
meaning.</p>
<p>FAIN.  He’s impudent?</p>
<p>WIT.  No that’s not it.</p>
<p>MIRA.  Vain?</p>
<p>WIT.  No.</p>
<p>MIRA.  What, he speaks unseasonable truths sometimes,
because he has not wit enough to invent an evasion?</p>
<p>WIT.  Truths?  Ha, ha, ha!  No, no, since you
will have it, I mean he never speaks truth at all, that’s
all.  He will lie like a chambermaid, or a woman of
quality’s porter.  Now that is a fault.</p>
<h3>SCENE VII.</h3>
<p style="text-align: center">[<i>To them</i>] <span class="smcap">Coachman</span>.</p>
<p>COACH.  Is Master Petulant here, mistress?</p>
<p>BET.  Yes.</p>
<p>COACH.  Three gentlewomen in a coach would speak with
him.</p>
<p>FAIN.  O brave Petulant!  Three!</p>
<p>BET.  I’ll tell him.</p>
<p>COACH.  You must bring two dishes of chocolate and a
glass of cinnamon water.</p>
<h3>SCENE VIII.</h3>
<p style="text-align: center"><span class="smcap">Mirabell</span>, <span class="smcap">Fainall</span>, <span class="smcap">Witwoud</span>.</p>
<p>WIT.  That should be for two fasting strumpets, and a
bawd troubled with wind.  Now you may know what the three
are.</p>
<p>MIRA.  You are very free with your friend’s
acquaintance.</p>
<p>WIT.  Ay, ay; friendship without freedom is as dull as
love without enjoyment or wine without toasting: but to tell you
a secret, these are trulls whom he allows coach-hire, and
something more by the week, to call on him once a day at public
places.</p>
<p>MIRA.  How!</p>
<p>WIT.  You shall see he won’t go to ’em
because there’s no more company here to take notice of
him.  Why, this is nothing to what he used to
do:—before he found out this way, I have known him call for
himself—</p>
<p>FAIN.  Call for himself?  What dost thou mean?</p>
<p>WIT.  Mean?  Why he would slip you out of this
chocolate-house, just when you had been talking to him.  As
soon as your back was turned—whip he was gone; then trip to
his lodging, clap on a hood and scarf and a mask, slap into a
hackney-coach, and drive hither to the door again in a trice;
where he would send in for himself; that I mean, call for
himself, wait for himself, nay, and what’s more, not
finding himself, sometimes leave a letter for himself.</p>
<p>MIRA.  I confess this is something extraordinary.  I
believe he waits for himself now, he is so long a coming; oh, I
ask his pardon.</p>
<h3>SCENE IX.</h3>
<p style="text-align: center"><span class="smcap">Petulant</span>, <span class="smcap">Mirabell</span>, <span class="smcap">Fainall</span>, <span class="smcap">Witwoud</span>,
<span class="smcap">Betty</span>.</p>
<p>BET.  Sir, the coach stays.</p>
<p>PET.  Well, well, I come.  ’Sbud, a man had as
good be a professed midwife as a professed whoremaster, at this
rate; to be knocked up and raised at all hours, and in all
places.  Pox on ’em, I won’t come. 
D’ye hear, tell ’em I won’t come.  Let
’em snivel and cry their hearts out.</p>
<p>FAIN.  You are very cruel, Petulant.</p>
<p>PET.  All’s one, let it pass.  I have a humour
to be cruel.</p>
<p>MIRA.  I hope they are not persons of condition that you
use at this rate.</p>
<p>PET.  Condition?  Condition’s a dried fig, if
I am not in humour.  By this hand, if they were
your—a—a—your what-d’ee-call-’ems
themselves, they must wait or rub off, if I want appetite.</p>
<p>MIRA.  What-d’ee-call-’ems!  What are
they, Witwoud?</p>
<p>WIT.  Empresses, my dear.  By your
what-d’ee-call-’ems he means Sultana Queens.</p>
<p>PET.  Ay, Roxolanas.</p>
<p>MIRA.  Cry you mercy.</p>
<p>FAIN.  Witwoud says they are—</p>
<p>PET.  What does he say th’are?</p>
<p>WIT.  I?  Fine ladies, I say.</p>
<p>PET.  Pass on, Witwoud.  Harkee, by this light, his
relations—two co-heiresses his cousins, and an old aunt,
who loves cater-wauling better than a conventicle.</p>
<p>WIT.  Ha, ha, ha!  I had a mind to see how the rogue
would come off.  Ha, ha, ha!  Gad, I can’t be
angry with him, if he had said they were my mother and my
sisters.</p>
<p>MIRA.  No?</p>
<p>WIT.  No; the rogue’s wit and readiness of
invention charm me, dear Petulant.</p>
<p>BET.  They are gone, sir, in great anger.</p>
<p>PET.  Enough, let ’em trundle.  Anger helps
complexion, saves paint.</p>
<p>FAIN.  This continence is all dissembled; this is in
order to have something to brag of the next time he makes court
to Millamant, and swear he has abandoned the whole sex for her
sake.</p>
<p>MIRA.  Have you not left off your impudent pretensions
there yet?  I shall cut your throat, sometime or other,
Petulant, about that business.</p>
<p>PET.  Ay, ay, let that pass.  There are other
throats to be cut.</p>
<p>MIRA.  Meaning mine, sir?</p>
<p>PET.  Not I—I mean nobody—I know
nothing.  But there are uncles and nephews in the
world—and they may be rivals.  What then? 
All’s one for that.</p>
<p>MIRA.  How?  Harkee, Petulant, come hither. 
Explain, or I shall call your interpreter.</p>
<p>PET.  Explain?  I know nothing.  Why, you have
an uncle, have you not, lately come to town, and lodges by my
Lady Wishfort’s?</p>
<p>MIRA.  True.</p>
<p>PET.  Why, that’s enough.  You and he are not
friends; and if he should marry and have a child, yon may be
disinherited, ha!</p>
<p>MIRA.  Where hast thou stumbled upon all this truth?</p>
<p>PET.  All’s one for that; why, then, say I know
something.</p>
<p>MIRA.  Come, thou art an honest fellow, Petulant, and
shalt make love to my mistress, thou shalt, faith.  What
hast thou heard of my uncle?</p>
<p>PET.  I?  Nothing, I.  If throats are to be
cut, let swords clash.  Snug’s the word; I shrug and
am silent.</p>
<p>MIRA.  Oh, raillery, raillery!  Come, I know thou
art in the women’s secrets.  What, you’re a
cabalist; I know you stayed at Millamant’s last night after
I went.  Was there any mention made of my uncle or me? 
Tell me; if thou hadst but good nature equal to thy wit,
Petulant, Tony Witwoud, who is now thy competitor in fame, would
show as dim by thee as a dead whiting’s eye by a pearl of
orient; he would no more be seen by thee than Mercury is by the
sun: come, I’m sure thou wo’t tell me.</p>
<p>PET.  If I do, will you grant me common sense, then, for
the future?</p>
<p>MIRA.  Faith, I’ll do what I can for thee, and
I’ll pray that heav’n may grant it thee in the
meantime.</p>
<p>PET.  Well, harkee.</p>
<p>FAIN.  Petulant and you both will find Mirabell as warm a
rival as a lover.</p>
<p>WIT.  Pshaw, pshaw, that she laughs at Petulant is
plain.  And for my part, but that it is almost a fashion to
admire her, I should—harkee—to tell you a secret, but
let it go no further between friends, I shall never break my
heart for her.</p>
<p>FAIN.  How?</p>
<p>WIT.  She’s handsome; but she’s a sort of an
uncertain woman.</p>
<p>FAIN.  I thought you had died for her.</p>
<p>WIT.  Umh—no—</p>
<p>FAIN.  She has wit.</p>
<p>WIT.  ’Tis what she will hardly allow anybody
else.  Now, demme, I should hate that, if she were as
handsome as Cleopatra.  Mirabell is not so sure of her as he
thinks for.</p>
<p>FAIN.  Why do you think so?</p>
<p>WIT.  We stayed pretty late there last night, and heard
something of an uncle to Mirabell, who is lately come to town,
and is between him and the best part of his estate. 
Mirabell and he are at some distance, as my Lady Wishfort has
been told; and you know she hates Mirabell worse than a quaker
hates a parrot, or than a fishmonger hates a hard frost. 
Whether this uncle has seen Mrs. Millamant or not, I cannot say;
but there were items of such a treaty being in embryo; and if it
should come to life, poor Mirabell would be in some sort
unfortunately fobbed, i’faith.</p>
<p>FAIN.  ’Tis impossible Millamant should hearken to
it.</p>
<p>WIT.  Faith, my dear, I can’t tell; she’s a
woman and a kind of a humorist.</p>
<p>MIRA.  And this is the sum of what you could collect last
night?</p>
<p>PET.  The quintessence.  Maybe Witwoud knows more;
he stayed longer.  Besides, they never mind him; they say
anything before him.</p>
<p>MIRA.  I thought you had been the greatest favourite.</p>
<p>PET.  Ay, tête-à-tête; but not in
public, because I make remarks.</p>
<p>MIRA.  You do?</p>
<p>PET.  Ay, ay, pox, I’m malicious, man.  Now
he’s soft, you know, they are not in awe of him.  The
fellow’s well bred, he’s what you call a—what
d’ye-call-’em—a fine gentleman, but he’s
silly withal.</p>
<p>MIRA.  I thank you, I know as much as my curiosity
requires.  Fainall, are you for the Mall?</p>
<p>FAIN.  Ay, I’ll take a turn before dinner.</p>
<p>WIT.  Ay, we’ll all walk in the park; the ladies
talked of being there.</p>
<p>MIRA.  I thought you were obliged to watch for your
brother Sir Wilfull’s arrival.</p>
<p>WIT.  No, no, he comes to his aunt’s, my Lady
Wishfort; pox on him, I shall be troubled with him too; what
shall I do with the fool?</p>
<p>PET.  Beg him for his estate, that I may beg you
afterwards, and so have but one trouble with you both.</p>
<p>WIT.  O rare Petulant, thou art as quick as fire in a
frosty morning; thou shalt to the Mall with us, and we’ll
be very severe.</p>
<p>PET.  Enough; I’m in a humour to be severe.</p>
<p>MIRA.  Are you?  Pray then walk by yourselves. 
Let not us be accessory to your putting the ladies out of
countenance with your senseless ribaldry, which you roar out
aloud as often as they pass by you, and when you have made a
handsome woman blush, then you think you have been severe.</p>
<p>PET.  What, what?  Then let ’em either show
their innocence by not understanding what they hear, or else show
their discretion by not hearing what they would not be thought to
understand.</p>
<p>MIRA.  But hast not thou then sense enough to know that
thou ought’st to be most ashamed thyself when thou hast put
another out of countenance?</p>
<p>PET.  Not I, by this hand: I always take blushing either
for a sign of guilt or ill-breeding.</p>
<p>MIRA.  I confess you ought to think so.  You are in
the right, that you may plead the error of your judgment in
defence of your practice.</p>
<p class="poetry">Where modesty’s ill manners, ’tis
but fit<br/>
That impudence and malice pass for wit.</p>
<h2>ACT II.—SCENE I.</h2>
<p style="text-align: center"><i>St. James’s Park</i>.</p>
<p style="text-align: center"><span class="smcap">Mrs.
Fainall</span> <i>and</i> <span class="smcap">Mrs.
Marwood</span>.</p>
<p>MRS. FAIN.  Ay, ay, dear Marwood, if we will be happy, we
must find the means in ourselves, and among ourselves.  Men
are ever in extremes; either doting or averse.  While they
are lovers, if they have fire and sense, their jealousies are
insupportable: and when they cease to love (we ought to think at
least) they loathe, they look upon us with horror and distaste,
they meet us like the ghosts of what we were, and as from such,
fly from us.</p>
<p>MRS. MAR.  True, ’tis an unhappy circumstance of
life that love should ever die before us, and that the man so
often should outlive the lover.  But say what you will,
’tis better to be left than never to have been loved. 
To pass our youth in dull indifference, to refuse the sweets of
life because they once must leave us, is as preposterous as to
wish to have been born old, because we one day must be old. 
For my part, my youth may wear and waste, but it shall never rust
in my possession.</p>
<p>MRS. FAIN.  Then it seems you dissemble an aversion to
mankind only in compliance to my mother’s humour.</p>
<p>MRS. MAR.  Certainly.  To be free, I have no taste
of those insipid dry discourses with which our sex of force must
entertain themselves apart from men.  We may affect
endearments to each other, profess eternal friendships, and seem
to dote like lovers; but ’tis not in our natures long to
persevere.  Love will resume his empire in our breasts, and
every heart, or soon or late, receive and readmit him as its
lawful tyrant.</p>
<p>MRS. FAIN.  Bless me, how have I been deceived! 
Why, you profess a libertine.</p>
<p>MRS. MAR.  You see my friendship by my freedom. 
Come, be as sincere, acknowledge that your sentiments agree with
mine.</p>
<p>MRS. FAIN.  Never.</p>
<p>MRS. MAR.  You hate mankind?</p>
<p>MRS. FAIN.  Heartily, inveterately.</p>
<p>MRS. MAR.  Your husband?</p>
<p>MRS. FAIN.  Most transcendently; ay, though I say it,
meritoriously.</p>
<p>MRS. MAR.  Give me your hand upon it.</p>
<p>MRS. FAIN.  There.</p>
<p>MRS. MAR.  I join with you; what I have said has been to
try you.</p>
<p>MRS. FAIN.  Is it possible?  Dost thou hate those
vipers, men?</p>
<p>MRS. MAR.  I have done hating ’em, and am now come
to despise ’em; the next thing I have to do is eternally to
forget ’em.</p>
<p>MRS. FAIN.  There spoke the spirit of an Amazon, a
Penthesilea.</p>
<p>MRS. MAR.  And yet I am thinking sometimes to carry my
aversion further.</p>
<p>MRS. FAIN.  How?</p>
<p>MRS. MAR.  Faith, by marrying; if I could but find one
that loved me very well, and would be throughly sensible of ill
usage, I think I should do myself the violence of undergoing the
ceremony.</p>
<p>MRS. FAIN.  You would not make him a cuckold?</p>
<p>MRS. MAR.  No; but I’d make him believe I did, and
that’s as bad.</p>
<p>MRS. FAIN.  Why had not you as good do it?</p>
<p>MRS. MAR.  Oh, if he should ever discover it, he would
then know the worst, and be out of his pain; but I would have him
ever to continue upon the rack of fear and jealousy.</p>
<p>MRS. FAIN.  Ingenious mischief!  Would thou wert
married to Mirabell.</p>
<p>MRS. MAR.  Would I were.</p>
<p>MRS. FAIN.  You change colour.</p>
<p>MRS. MAR.  Because I hate him.</p>
<p>MRS. FAIN.  So do I; but I can hear him named.  But
what reason have you to hate him in particular?</p>
<p>MRS. MAR.  I never loved him; he is, and always was,
insufferably proud.</p>
<p>MRS. FAIN.  By the reason you give for your aversion, one
would think it dissembled; for you have laid a fault to his
charge, of which his enemies must acquit him.</p>
<p>MRS. MAR.  Oh, then it seems you are one of his
favourable enemies.  Methinks you look a little pale, and
now you flush again.</p>
<p>MRS. FAIN.  Do I?  I think I am a little sick
o’ the sudden.</p>
<p>MRS. MAR.  What ails you?</p>
<p>MRS. FAIN.  My husband.  Don’t you see
him?  He turned short upon me unawares, and has almost
overcome me.</p>
<h3>SCENE II.</h3>
<p style="text-align: center">[<i>To them</i>] <span class="smcap">Fainall</span> <i>and</i> <span class="smcap">Mirabell</span>.</p>
<p>MRS. MAR.  Ha, ha, ha! he comes opportunely for you.</p>
<p>MRS. FAIN.  For you, for he has brought Mirabell with
him.</p>
<p>FAIN.  My dear.</p>
<p>MRS. FAIN.  My soul.</p>
<p>FAIN.  You don’t look well to-day, child.</p>
<p>MRS. FAIN.  D’ye think so?</p>
<p>MIRA.  He is the only man that does, madam.</p>
<p>MRS. FAIN.  The only man that would tell me so at least,
and the only man from whom I could hear it without
mortification.</p>
<p>FAIN.  Oh, my dear, I am satisfied of your tenderness; I
know you cannot resent anything from me; especially what is an
effect of my concern.</p>
<p>MRS. FAIN.  Mr. Mirabell, my mother interrupted you in a
pleasant relation last night: I would fain hear it out.</p>
<p>MIRA.  The persons concerned in that affair have yet a
tolerable reputation.  I am afraid Mr. Fainall will be
censorious.</p>
<p>MRS. FAIN.  He has a humour more prevailing than his
curiosity, and will willingly dispense with the hearing of one
scandalous story, to avoid giving an occasion to make another by
being seen to walk with his wife.  This way, Mr. Mirabell,
and I dare promise you will oblige us both.</p>
<h3>SCENE III.</h3>
<p style="text-align: center"><span class="smcap">Fainall</span>,
<span class="smcap">Mrs. Marwood</span>.</p>
<p>FAIN.  Excellent creature!  Well, sure, if I should
live to be rid of my wife, I should be a miserable man.</p>
<p>MRS. MAR.  Ay?</p>
<p>FAIN.  For having only that one hope, the accomplishment
of it of consequence must put an end to all my hopes, and what a
wretch is he who must survive his hopes!  Nothing remains
when that day comes but to sit down and weep like Alexander when
he wanted other worlds to conquer.</p>
<p>MRS. MAR.  Will you not follow ’em?</p>
<p>FAIN.  Faith, I think not,</p>
<p>MRS. MAR.  Pray let us; I have a reason.</p>
<p>FAIN.  You are not jealous?</p>
<p>MRS. MAR.  Of whom?</p>
<p>FAIN.  Of Mirabell.</p>
<p>MRS. MAR.  If I am, is it inconsistent with my love to
you that I am tender of your honour?</p>
<p>FAIN.  You would intimate then, as if there were a
fellow-feeling between my wife and him?</p>
<p>MRS. MAR.  I think she does not hate him to that degree
she would be thought.</p>
<p>FAIN.  But he, I fear, is too insensible.</p>
<p>MRS. MAR.  It may be you are deceived.</p>
<p>FAIN.  It may be so.  I do not now begin to
apprehend it.</p>
<p>MRS. MAR.  What?</p>
<p>FAIN.  That I have been deceived, madam, and you are
false.</p>
<p>MRS. MAR.  That I am false?  What mean you?</p>
<p>FAIN.  To let you know I see through all your little
arts.—Come, you both love him, and both have equally
dissembled your aversion.  Your mutual jealousies of one
another have made you clash till you have both struck fire. 
I have seen the warm confession red’ning on your cheeks,
and sparkling from your eyes.</p>
<p>MRS. MAR.  You do me wrong.</p>
<p>FAIN.  I do not.  ’Twas for my ease to oversee
and wilfully neglect the gross advances made him by my wife, that
by permitting her to be engaged, I might continue unsuspected in
my pleasures, and take you oftener to my arms in full
security.  But could you think, because the nodding husband
would not wake, that e’er the watchful lover slept?</p>
<p>MRS. MAR.  And wherewithal can you reproach me?</p>
<p>FAIN.  With infidelity, with loving another, with love of
Mirabell.</p>
<p>MRS. MAR.  ’Tis false.  I challenge you to
show an instance that can confirm your groundless
accusation.  I hate him.</p>
<p>FAIN.  And wherefore do you hate him?  He is
insensible, and your resentment follows his neglect.  An
instance?  The injuries you have done him are a proof: your
interposing in his love.  What cause had you to make
discoveries of his pretended passion?  To undeceive the
credulous aunt, and be the officious obstacle of his match with
Millamant?</p>
<p>MRS. MAR.  My obligations to my lady urged me: I had
professed a friendship to her, and could not see her easy nature
so abused by that dissembler.</p>
<p>FAIN.  What, was it conscience then?  Professed a
friendship!  Oh, the pious friendships of the female
sex!</p>
<p>MRS. MAR.  More tender, more sincere, and more enduring,
than all the vain and empty vows of men, whether professing love
to us or mutual faith to one another.</p>
<p>FAIN.  Ha, ha, ha! you are my wife’s friend
too.</p>
<p>MRS. MAR.  Shame and ingratitude!  Do you reproach
me?  You, you upbraid me?  Have I been false to her,
through strict fidelity to you, and sacrificed my friendship to
keep my love inviolate?  And have you the baseness to charge
me with the guilt, unmindful of the merit?  To you it should
be meritorious that I have been vicious.  And do you reflect
that guilt upon me which should lie buried in your bosom?</p>
<p>FAIN.  You misinterpret my reproof.  I meant but to
remind you of the slight account you once could make of strictest
ties when set in competition with your love to me.</p>
<p>MRS. MAR.  ’Tis false, you urged it with deliberate
malice.  ’Twas spoke in scorn, and I never will
forgive it.</p>
<p>FAIN.  Your guilt, not your resentment, begets your
rage.  If yet you loved, you could forgive a jealousy: but
you are stung to find you are discovered.</p>
<p>MRS. MAR.  It shall be all discovered.  You too
shall be discovered; be sure you shall.  I can but be
exposed.  If I do it myself I shall prevent your
baseness.</p>
<p>FAIN.  Why, what will you do?</p>
<p>MRS. MAR.  Disclose it to your wife; own what has past
between us.</p>
<p>FAIN.  Frenzy!</p>
<p>MRS. MAR.  By all my wrongs I’ll do’t. 
I’ll publish to the world the injuries you have done me,
both in my fame and fortune: with both I trusted you, you
bankrupt in honour, as indigent of wealth.</p>
<p>FAIN.  Your fame I have preserved.  Your fortune has
been bestowed as the prodigality of your love would have it, in
pleasures which we both have shared.  Yet, had not you been
false I had e’er this repaid it.  ’Tis
true—had you permitted Mirabell with Millamant to have
stolen their marriage, my lady had been incensed beyond all means
of reconcilement: Millamant had forfeited the moiety of her
fortune, which then would have descended to my wife.  And
wherefore did I marry but to make lawful prize of a rich
widow’s wealth, and squander it on love and you?</p>
<p>MRS. MAR.  Deceit and frivolous pretence!</p>
<p>FAIN.  Death, am I not married?  What’s
pretence?  Am I not imprisoned, fettered?  Have I not a
wife?  Nay, a wife that was a widow, a young widow, a
handsome widow, and would be again a widow, but that I have a
heart of proof, and something of a constitution to bustle through
the ways of wedlock and this world.  Will you yet be
reconciled to truth and me?</p>
<p>MRS. MAR.  Impossible.  Truth and you are
inconsistent.—I hate you, and shall for ever.</p>
<p>FAIN.  For loving you?</p>
<p>MRS. MAR.  I loathe the name of love after such usage;
and next to the guilt with which you would asperse me, I scorn
you most.  Farewell.</p>
<p>FAIN.  Nay, we must not part thus.</p>
<p>MRS. MAR.  Let me go.</p>
<p>FAIN.  Come, I’m sorry.</p>
<p>MRS. MAR.  I care not.  Let me go.  Break my
hands, do—I’d leave ’em to get loose.</p>
<p>FAIN.  I would not hurt you for the world.  Have I
no other hold to keep you here?</p>
<p>MRS. MAR.  Well, I have deserved it all.</p>
<p>FAIN.  You know I love you.</p>
<p>MRS. MAR.  Poor dissembling!  Oh, that—well,
it is not yet—</p>
<p>FAIN.  What?  What is it not?  What is it not
yet?  It is not yet too late—</p>
<p>MRS. MAR.  No, it is not yet too late—I have that
comfort.</p>
<p>FAIN.  It is, to love another.</p>
<p>MRS. MAR.  But not to loathe, detest, abhor mankind,
myself, and the whole treacherous world.</p>
<p>FAIN.  Nay, this is extravagance.  Come, I ask your
pardon.  No tears—I was to blame, I could not love you
and be easy in my doubts.  Pray forbear—I believe you;
I’m convinced I’ve done you wrong; and any way, every
way will make amends: I’ll hate my wife yet more, damn her,
I’ll part with her, rob her of all she’s worth, and
we’ll retire somewhere, anywhere, to another world;
I’ll marry thee—be pacified.—’Sdeath,
they come: hide your face, your tears.  You have a mask:
wear it a moment.  This way, this way: be persuaded.</p>
<h3>SCENE IV.</h3>
<p style="text-align: center"><span class="smcap">Mirabell</span>
<i>and</i> <span class="smcap">Mrs. Fainall</span>.</p>
<p>MRS. FAIN.  They are here yet.</p>
<p>MIRA.  They are turning into the other walk.</p>
<p>MRS. FAIN.  While I only hated my husband, I could bear
to see him; but since I have despised him, he’s too
offensive.</p>
<p>MIRA.  Oh, you should hate with prudence.</p>
<p>MRS. FAIN.  Yes, for I have loved with indiscretion.</p>
<p>MIRA.  You should have just so much disgust for your
husband as may be sufficient to make you relish your lover.</p>
<p>MRS. FAIN.  You have been the cause that I have loved
without bounds, and would you set limits to that aversion of
which you have been the occasion?  Why did you make me marry
this man?</p>
<p>MIRA.  Why do we daily commit disagreeable and dangerous
actions?  To save that idol, reputation.  If the
familiarities of our loves had produced that consequence of which
you were apprehensive, where could you have fixed a
father’s name with credit but on a husband?  I knew
Fainall to be a man lavish of his morals, an interested and
professing friend, a false and a designing lover, yet one whose
wit and outward fair behaviour have gained a reputation with the
town, enough to make that woman stand excused who has suffered
herself to be won by his addresses.  A better man ought not
to have been sacrificed to the occasion; a worse had not answered
to the purpose.  When you are weary of him you know your
remedy.</p>
<p>MRS. FAIN.  I ought to stand in some degree of credit
with you, Mirabell.</p>
<p>MIRA.  In justice to you, I have made you privy to my
whole design, and put it in your power to ruin or advance my
fortune.</p>
<p>MRS. FAIN.  Whom have you instructed to represent your
pretended uncle?</p>
<p>MIRA.  Waitwell, my servant.</p>
<p>MRS. FAIN.  He is an humble servant to Foible, my
mother’s woman, and may win her to your interest.</p>
<p>MIRA.  Care is taken for that.  She is won and worn
by this time.  They were married this morning.</p>
<p>MRS. FAIN.  Who?</p>
<p>MIRA.  Waitwell and Foible.  I would not tempt my
servant to betray me by trusting him too far.  If your
mother, in hopes to ruin me, should consent to marry my pretended
uncle, he might, like Mosca in the <i>Fox</i>, stand upon terms;
so I made him sure beforehand.</p>
<p>MRS. FAIN.  So, if my poor mother is caught in a
contract, you will discover the imposture betimes, and release
her by producing a certificate of her gallant’s former
marriage.</p>
<p>MIRA.  Yes, upon condition that she consent to my
marriage with her niece, and surrender the moiety of her fortune
in her possession.</p>
<p>MRS. FAIN.  She talked last night of endeavouring at a
match between Millamant and your uncle.</p>
<p>MIRA.  That was by Foible’s direction and my
instruction, that she might seem to carry it more privately.</p>
<p>MRS. FAIN.  Well, I have an opinion of your success, for
I believe my lady will do anything to get an husband; and when
she has this, which you have provided for her, I suppose she will
submit to anything to get rid of him.</p>
<p>MIRA.  Yes, I think the good lady would marry anything
that resembled a man, though ’twere no more than what a
butler could pinch out of a napkin.</p>
<p>MRS. FAIN.  Female frailty!  We must all come to it,
if we live to be old, and feel the craving of a false appetite
when the true is decayed.</p>
<p>MIRA.  An old woman’s appetite is depraved like
that of a girl.  ’Tis the green-sickness of a second
childhood, and, like the faint offer of a latter spring, serves
but to usher in the fall, and withers in an affected bloom.</p>
<p>MRS. FAIN.  Here’s your mistress.</p>
<h3>SCENE V.</h3>
<p style="text-align: center">[<i>To them</i>] <span class="smcap">Mrs. Millamant</span>, <span class="smcap">Witwoud</span>, <span class="smcap">Mincing</span>.</p>
<p>MIRA.  Here she comes, i’faith, full sail, with her
fan spread and streamers out, and a shoal of fools for
tenders.—Ha, no, I cry her mercy.</p>
<p>MRS. FAIN.  I see but one poor empty sculler, and he tows
her woman after him.</p>
<p>MIRA.  You seem to be unattended, madam.  You used
to have the <i>beau monde</i> throng after you, and a flock of
gay fine perukes hovering round you.</p>
<p>WIT.  Like moths about a candle.  I had like to have
lost my comparison for want of breath.</p>
<p>MILLA.  Oh, I have denied myself airs to-day.  I
have walked as fast through the crowd—</p>
<p>WIT.  As a favourite just disgraced, and with as few
followers.</p>
<p>MILLA.  Dear Mr. Witwoud, truce with your similitudes,
for I am as sick of ’em—</p>
<p>WIT.  As a physician of a good air.  I cannot help
it, madam, though ’tis against myself.</p>
<p>MILLA.  Yet again!  Mincing, stand between me and
his wit.</p>
<p>WIT.  Do, Mrs. Mincing, like a screen before a great
fire.  I confess I do blaze to-day; I am too bright.</p>
<p>MRS. FAIN.  But, dear Millamant, why were you so
long?</p>
<p>MILLA.  Long!  Lord, have I not made violent
haste?  I have asked every living thing I met for you; I
have enquired after you, as after a new fashion.</p>
<p>WIT.  Madam, truce with your similitudes.—No, you
met her husband, and did not ask him for her.</p>
<p>MIRA.  By your leave, Witwoud, that were like enquiring
after an old fashion to ask a husband for his wife.</p>
<p>WIT.  Hum, a hit, a hit, a palpable hit; I confess
it.</p>
<p>MRS. FAIN.  You were dressed before I came abroad.</p>
<p>MILLA.  Ay, that’s true.  Oh, but then I
had—Mincing, what had I?  Why was I so long?</p>
<p>MINC.  O mem, your laship stayed to peruse a packet of
letters.</p>
<p>MILLA.  Oh, ay, letters—I had letters—I am
persecuted with letters—I hate letters.  Nobody knows
how to write letters; and yet one has ’em, one does not
know why.  They serve one to pin up one’s hair.</p>
<p>WIT.  Is that the way?  Pray, madam, do you pin up
your hair with all your letters?  I find I must keep
copies.</p>
<p>MILLA.  Only with those in verse, Mr. Witwoud.  I
never pin up my hair with prose.  I think I tried once,
Mincing.</p>
<p>MINC.  O mem, I shall never forget it.</p>
<p>MILLA.  Ay, poor Mincing tift and tift all the
morning.</p>
<p>MINC.  Till I had the cramp in my fingers, I’ll
vow, mem.  And all to no purpose.  But when your laship
pins it up with poetry, it fits so pleasant the next day as
anything, and is so pure and so crips.</p>
<p>WIT.  Indeed, so crips?</p>
<p>MINC.  You’re such a critic, Mr. Witwoud.</p>
<p>MILLA.  Mirabell, did you take exceptions last
night?  Oh, ay, and went away.  Now I think on’t
I’m angry—no, now I think on’t I’m
pleased:—for I believe I gave you some pain.</p>
<p>MIRA.  Does that please you?</p>
<p>MILLA.  Infinitely; I love to give pain.</p>
<p>MIRA.  You would affect a cruelty which is not in your
nature; your true vanity is in the power of pleasing.</p>
<p>MILLA.  Oh, I ask your pardon for that.  One’s
cruelty is one’s power, and when one parts with one’s
cruelty one parts with one’s power, and when one has parted
with that, I fancy one’s old and ugly.</p>
<p>MIRA.  Ay, ay; suffer your cruelty to ruin the object of
your power, to destroy your lover—and then how vain, how
lost a thing you’ll be!  Nay, ’tis true; you are
no longer handsome when you’ve lost your lover: your beauty
dies upon the instant.  For beauty is the lover’s
gift: ’tis he bestows your charms:—your glass is all
a cheat.  The ugly and the old, whom the looking-glass
mortifies, yet after commendation can be flattered by it, and
discover beauties in it: for that reflects our praises rather
than your face.</p>
<p>MILLA.  Oh, the vanity of these men!  Fainall,
d’ye hear him?  If they did not commend us, we were
not handsome!  Now you must know they could not commend one
if one was not handsome.  Beauty the lover’s
gift!  Lord, what is a lover, that it can give?  Why,
one makes lovers as fast as one pleases, and they live as long as
one pleases, and they die as soon as one pleases; and then, if
one pleases, one makes more.</p>
<p>WIT.  Very pretty.  Why, you make no more of making
of lovers, madam, than of making so many card-matches.</p>
<p>MILLA.  One no more owes one’s beauty to a lover
than one’s wit to an echo.  They can but reflect what
we look and say: vain empty things if we are silent or unseen,
and want a being.</p>
<p>MIRA.  Yet, to those two vain empty things, you owe two
the greatest pleasures of your life.</p>
<p>MILLA.  How so?</p>
<p>MIRA.  To your lover you owe the pleasure of hearing
yourselves praised, and to an echo the pleasure of hearing
yourselves talk.</p>
<p>WIT.  But I know a lady that loves talking so
incessantly, she won’t give an echo fair play; she has that
everlasting rotation of tongue that an echo must wait till she
dies before it can catch her last words.</p>
<p>MILLA.  Oh, fiction; Fainall, let us leave these men.</p>
<p>MIRA.  Draw off Witwoud.  [<i>Aside to</i> <span class="smcap">Mrs. Fainall</span>.]</p>
<p>MRS. FAIN.  Immediately; I have a word or two for Mr.
Witwoud.</p>
<h3>SCENE VI.</h3>
<p style="text-align: center"><span class="smcap">Mrs.
Millamant</span>, <span class="smcap">Mirabell</span>, <span class="smcap">Mincing</span>.</p>
<p>MIRA.  I would beg a little private audience too. 
You had the tyranny to deny me last night, though you knew I came
to impart a secret to you that concerned my love.</p>
<p>MILLA.  You saw I was engaged.</p>
<p>MIRA.  Unkind!  You had the leisure to entertain a
herd of fools: things who visit you from their excessive
idleness, bestowing on your easiness that time which is the
incumbrance of their lives.  How can you find delight in
such society?  It is impossible they should admire you; they
are not capable; or, if they were, it should be to you as a
mortification: for, sure, to please a fool is some degree of
folly.</p>
<p>MILLA.  I please myself.—Besides, sometimes to
converse with fools is for my health.</p>
<p>MIRA.  Your health!  Is there a worse disease than
the conversation of fools?</p>
<p>MILLA.  Yes, the vapours; fools are physic for it, next
to assafoetida.</p>
<p>MIRA.  You are not in a course of fools?</p>
<p>MILLA.  Mirabell, if you persist in this offensive
freedom you’ll displease me.  I think I must resolve
after all not to have you:—we shan’t agree.</p>
<p>MIRA.  Not in our physic, it may be.</p>
<p>MILLA.  And yet our distemper in all likelihood will be
the same; for we shall be sick of one another.  I
shan’t endure to be reprimanded nor instructed; ’tis
so dull to act always by advice, and so tedious to be told of
one’s faults, I can’t bear it.  Well, I
won’t have you, Mirabell—I’m resolved—I
think—you may go—ha, ha, ha!  What would you
give that you could help loving me?</p>
<p>MIRA.  I would give something that you did not know I
could not help it.</p>
<p>MILLA.  Come, don’t look grave then.  Well,
what do you say to me?</p>
<p>MIRA.  I say that a man may as soon make a friend by his
wit, or a fortune by his honesty, as win a woman with
plain-dealing and sincerity.</p>
<p>MILLA.  Sententious Mirabell!  Prithee don’t
look with that violent and inflexible wise face, like Solomon at
the dividing of the child in an old tapestry hanging!</p>
<p>MIRA.  You are merry, madam, but I would persuade you for
a moment to be serious.</p>
<p>MILLA.  What, with that face?  No, if you keep your
countenance, ’tis impossible I should hold mine. 
Well, after all, there is something very moving in a lovesick
face.  Ha, ha, ha!  Well I won’t laugh;
don’t be peevish.  Heigho!  Now I’ll be
melancholy, as melancholy as a watch-light.  Well, Mirabell,
if ever you will win me, woo me now.—Nay, if you are so
tedious, fare you well: I see they are walking away.</p>
<p>MIRA.  Can you not find in the variety of your
disposition one moment—</p>
<p>MILLA.  To hear you tell me Foible’s married, and
your plot like to speed?  No.</p>
<p>MIRA.  But how you came to know it—</p>
<p>MILLA.  Without the help of the devil, you can’t
imagine; unless she should tell me herself.  Which of the
two it may have been, I will leave you to consider; and when you
have done thinking of that, think of me.</p>
<h3>SCENE VII.</h3>
<p style="text-align: center"><span class="smcap">Mirabell</span>
<i>alone</i>.</p>
<p>MIRA.  I have something more.—Gone!  Think of
you?  To think of a whirlwind, though ’twere in a
whirlwind, were a case of more steady contemplation, a very
tranquillity of mind and mansion.  A fellow that lives in a
windmill has not a more whimsical dwelling than the heart of a
man that is lodged in a woman.  There is no point of the
compass to which they cannot turn, and by which they are not
turned, and by one as well as another; for motion, not method, is
their occupation.  To know this, and yet continue to be in
love, is to be made wise from the dictates of reason, and yet
persevere to play the fool by the force of instinct.—Oh,
here come my pair of turtles.  What, billing so
sweetly?  Is not Valentine’s day over with you
yet?</p>
<h3>SCENE VIII.</h3>
<p style="text-align: center">[<i>To him</i>] <span class="smcap">Waitwell</span>, <span class="smcap">Foible</span>.</p>
<p>MIRA.  Sirrah, Waitwell, why, sure, you think you were
married for your own recreation and not for my conveniency.</p>
<p>WAIT.  Your pardon, sir.  With submission, we have
indeed been solacing in lawful delights; but still with an eye to
business, sir.  I have instructed her as well as I
could.  If she can take your directions as readily as my
instructions, sir, your affairs are in a prosperous way.</p>
<p>MIRA.  Give you joy, Mrs. Foible.</p>
<p>FOIB.  O—las, sir, I’m so
ashamed.—I’m afraid my lady has been in a thousand
inquietudes for me.  But I protest, sir, I made as much
haste as I could.</p>
<p>WAIT.  That she did indeed, sir.  It was my fault
that she did not make more.</p>
<p>MIRA.  That I believe.</p>
<p>FOIB.  But I told my lady as you instructed me, sir, that
I had a prospect of seeing Sir Rowland, your uncle, and that I
would put her ladyship’s picture in my pocket to show him,
which I’ll be sure to say has made him so enamoured of her
beauty, that he burns with impatience to lie at her
ladyship’s feet and worship the original.</p>
<p>MIRA.  Excellent Foible!  Matrimony has made you
eloquent in love.</p>
<p>WAIT.  I think she has profited, sir.  I think
so.</p>
<p>FOIB.  You have seen Madam Millamant, sir?</p>
<p>MIRA.  Yes.</p>
<p>FOIB.  I told her, sir, because I did not know that you
might find an opportunity; she had so much company last
night.</p>
<p>MIRA.  Your diligence will merit more.  In the
meantime—[<i>gives money</i>]</p>
<p>FOIB.  O dear sir, your humble servant.</p>
<p>WAIT.  Spouse—</p>
<p>MIRA.  Stand off, sir, not a penny.  Go on and
prosper, Foible.  The lease shall be made good and the farm
stocked, if we succeed.</p>
<p>FOIB.  I don’t question your generosity, sir, and
you need not doubt of success.  If you have no more
commands, sir, I’ll be gone; I’m sure my lady is at
her toilet, and can’t dress till I come.  Oh dear,
I’m sure that [<i>looking out</i>] was Mrs. Marwood that
went by in a mask; if she has seen me with you I’m sure
she’ll tell my lady.  I’ll make haste home and
prevent her.  Your servant, Sir.—B’w’y,
Waitwell.</p>
<h3>SCENE IX.</h3>
<p style="text-align: center"><span class="smcap">Mirabell</span>, <span class="smcap">Waitwell</span>.</p>
<p>WAIT.  Sir Rowland, if you please.  The jade’s
so pert upon her preferment she forgets herself.</p>
<p>MIRA.  Come, sir, will you endeavour to forget
yourself—and transform into Sir Rowland?</p>
<p>WAIT.  Why, sir, it will be impossible I should remember
myself.  Married, knighted, and attended all in one
day!  ’Tis enough to make any man forget
himself.  The difficulty will be how to recover my
acquaintance and familiarity with my former self, and fall from
my transformation to a reformation into Waitwell.  Nay, I
shan’t be quite the same Waitwell neither—for now I
remember me, I’m married, and can’t be my own man
again.</p>
<p class="poetry">Ay, there’s my grief; that’s the
sad change of life:<br/>
To lose my title, and yet keep my wife.</p>
<h2>ACT III.—SCENE I.</h2>
<p style="text-align: center"><i>A room in Lady Wishfort’s
house</i>.</p>
<p style="text-align: center"><span class="smcap">Lady
Wishfort</span> <i>at her toilet</i>, <span class="smcap">Peg</span> <i>waiting</i>.</p>
<p>LADY.  Merciful!  No news of Foible yet?</p>
<p>PEG.  No, madam.</p>
<p>LADY.  I have no more patience.  If I have not
fretted myself till I am pale again, there’s no veracity in
me.  Fetch me the red—the red, do you hear,
sweetheart?  An errant ash colour, as I’m a
person.  Look you how this wench stirs!  Why dost thou
not fetch me a little red?  Didst thou not hear me,
Mopus?</p>
<p>PEG.  The red ratafia, does your ladyship mean, or the
cherry brandy?</p>
<p>LADY.  Ratafia, fool?  No, fool.  Not the
ratafia, fool—grant me patience!—I mean the Spanish
paper, idiot; complexion, darling.  Paint, paint, paint,
dost thou understand that, changeling, dangling thy hands like
bobbins before thee?  Why dost thou not stir, puppet? 
Thou wooden thing upon wires!</p>
<p>PEG.  Lord, madam, your ladyship is so impatient.—I
cannot come at the paint, madam: Mrs. Foible has locked it up,
and carried the key with her.</p>
<p>LADY.  A pox take you both.—Fetch me the cherry
brandy then.</p>
<h3>SCENE II.</h3>
<p style="text-align: center"><span class="smcap">Lady
Wishfort</span>.</p>
<p>I’m as pale and as faint, I look like Mrs. Qualmsick,
the curate’s wife, that’s always breeding. 
Wench, come, come, wench, what art thou doing? 
Sipping?  Tasting?  Save thee, dost thou not know the
bottle?</p>
<h3>SCENE III.</h3>
<p style="text-align: center"><span class="smcap">Lady
Wishfort</span>, <span class="smcap">Peg</span> <i>with a bottle
and china cup</i>.</p>
<p>PEG.  Madam, I was looking for a cup.</p>
<p>LADY.  A cup, save thee, and what a cup hast thou
brought!  Dost thou take me for a fairy, to drink out of an
acorn?  Why didst thou not bring thy thimble?  Hast
thou ne’er a brass thimble clinking in thy pocket with a
bit of nutmeg?  I warrant thee.  Come, fill,
fill.  So, again.  See who that is.  [<i>One
knocks</i>.]  Set down the bottle first.  Here, here,
under the table:—what, wouldst thou go with the bottle in
thy hand like a tapster?  As I’m a person, this wench
has lived in an inn upon the road, before she came to me, like
Maritornes the Asturian in Don Quixote.  No Foible yet?</p>
<p>PEG.  No, madam; Mrs. Marwood.</p>
<p>LADY.  Oh, Marwood: let her come in.  Come in, good
Marwood.</p>
<h3>SCENE IV.</h3>
<p style="text-align: center">[<i>To them</i>] <span class="smcap">Mrs. Marwood</span>.</p>
<p>MRS. MAR.  I’m surprised to find your ladyship in
<i>déshabillé</i> at this time of day.</p>
<p>LADY.  Foible’s a lost thing; has been abroad since
morning, and never heard of since.</p>
<p>MRS. MAR.  I saw her but now, as I came masked through
the park, in conference with Mirabell.</p>
<p>LADY.  With Mirabell?  You call my blood into my
face with mentioning that traitor.  She durst not have the
confidence.  I sent her to negotiate an affair, in which if
I’m detected I’m undone.  If that wheedling
villain has wrought upon Foible to detect me, I’m
ruined.  O my dear friend, I’m a wretch of wretches if
I’m detected.</p>
<p>MRS. MAR.  O madam, you cannot suspect Mrs.
Foible’s integrity.</p>
<p>LADY.  Oh, he carries poison in his tongue that would
corrupt integrity itself.  If she has given him an
opportunity, she has as good as put her integrity into his
hands.  Ah, dear Marwood, what’s integrity to an
opportunity?  Hark!  I hear her.  Dear friend,
retire into my closet, that I may examine her with more
freedom—you’ll pardon me, dear friend, I can make
bold with you—there are books over the
chimney—Quarles and Pryn, and the <i>Short View of the
Stage</i>, with Bunyan’s works to entertain you.—Go,
you thing, and send her in.  [<i>To</i> <span class="smcap">Peg</span>.]</p>
<h3>SCENE V.</h3>
<p style="text-align: center"><span class="smcap">Lady
Wishfort</span>, <span class="smcap">Foible</span>.</p>
<p>LADY.  O Foible, where hast thou been?  What hast
thou been doing?</p>
<p>FOIB.  Madam, I have seen the party.</p>
<p>LADY.  But what hast thou done?</p>
<p>FOIB.  Nay, ’tis your ladyship has done, and are to
do; I have only promised.  But a man so enamoured—so
transported!  Well, if worshipping of pictures be a
sin—poor Sir Rowland, I say.</p>
<p>LADY.  The miniature has been counted like.  But
hast thou not betrayed me, Foible?  Hast thou not detected
me to that faithless Mirabell?  What hast thou to do with
him in the park?  Answer me, has he got nothing out of
thee?</p>
<p>FOIB.  So, the devil has been beforehand with me; what
shall I say?—Alas, madam, could I help it, if I met that
confident thing?  Was I in fault?  If you had heard how
he used me, and all upon your ladyship’s account, I’m
sure you would not suspect my fidelity.  Nay, if that had
been the worst I could have borne: but he had a fling at your
ladyship too, and then I could not hold; but, i’faith I
gave him his own.</p>
<p>LADY.  Me?  What did the filthy fellow say?</p>
<p>FOIB.  O madam, ’tis a shame to say what he said,
with his taunts and his fleers, tossing up his nose.  Humh,
says he, what, you are a-hatching some plot, says he, you are so
early abroad, or catering, says he, ferreting for some disbanded
officer, I warrant.  Half pay is but thin subsistence, says
he.  Well, what pension does your lady propose?  Let me
see, says he, what, she must come down pretty deep now,
she’s superannuated, says he, and—</p>
<p>LADY.  Ods my life, I’ll have him—I’ll
have him murdered.  I’ll have him poisoned. 
Where does he eat?  I’ll marry a drawer to have him
poisoned in his wine.  I’ll send for Robin from
Locket’s—immediately.</p>
<p>FOIB.  Poison him?  Poisoning’s too good for
him.  Starve him, madam, starve him; marry Sir Rowland, and
get him disinherited.  Oh, you would bless yourself to hear
what he said.</p>
<p>LADY.  A villain; superannuated?</p>
<p>FOIB.  Humh, says he, I hear you are laying designs
against me too, says he, and Mrs. Millamant is to marry my uncle
(he does not suspect a word of your ladyship); but, says he,
I’ll fit you for that, I warrant you, says he, I’ll
hamper you for that, says he, you and your old frippery too, says
he, I’ll handle you—</p>
<p>LADY.  Audacious villain!  Handle me?  Would he
durst?  Frippery?  Old frippery?  Was there ever
such a foul-mouthed fellow?  I’ll be married
to-morrow, I’ll be contracted to-night.</p>
<p>FOIB.  The sooner the better, madam.</p>
<p>LADY.  Will Sir Rowland be here, say’st thou? 
When, Foible?</p>
<p>FOIB.  Incontinently, madam.  No new sheriff’s
wife expects the return of her husband after knighthood with that
impatience in which Sir Rowland burns for the dear hour of
kissing your ladyship’s hand after dinner.</p>
<p>LADY.  Frippery?  Superannuated frippery? 
I’ll frippery the villain; I’ll reduce him to
frippery and rags, a tatterdemalion!—I hope to see him hung
with tatters, like a Long Lane pent-house, or a gibbet
thief.  A slander-mouthed railer!  I warrant the
spendthrift prodigal’s in debt as much as the million
lottery, or the whole court upon a birthday.  I’ll
spoil his credit with his tailor.  Yes, he shall have my
niece with her fortune, he shall.</p>
<p>FOIB.  He?  I hope to see him lodge in Ludgate
first, and angle into Blackfriars for brass farthings with an old
mitten.</p>
<p>LADY.  Ay, dear Foible; thank thee for that, dear
Foible.  He has put me out of all patience.  I shall
never recompose my features to receive Sir Rowland with any
economy of face.  This wretch has fretted me that I am
absolutely decayed.  Look, Foible.</p>
<p>FOIB.  Your ladyship has frowned a little too rashly,
indeed, madam.  There are some cracks discernible in the
white vernish.</p>
<p>LADY.  Let me see the glass.  Cracks, say’st
thou?  Why, I am arrantly flayed: I look like an old peeled
wall.  Thou must repair me, Foible, before Sir Rowland
comes, or I shall never keep up to my picture.</p>
<p>FOIB.  I warrant you, madam: a little art once made your
picture like you, and now a little of the same art must make you
like your picture.  Your picture must sit for you,
madam.</p>
<p>LADY.  But art thou sure Sir Rowland will not fail to
come?  Or will a not fail when he does come?  Will he
be importunate, Foible, and push?  For if he should not be
importunate I shall never break decorums.  I shall die with
confusion if I am forced to advance—oh no, I can never
advance; I shall swoon if he should expect advances.  No, I
hope Sir Rowland is better bred than to put a lady to the
necessity of breaking her forms.  I won’t be too coy
neither—I won’t give him despair.  But a little
disdain is not amiss; a little scorn is alluring.</p>
<p>FOIB.  A little scorn becomes your ladyship.</p>
<p>LADY.  Yes, but tenderness becomes me best—a sort
of a dyingness.  You see that picture has a sort of
a—ha, Foible?  A swimmingness in the eyes.  Yes,
I’ll look so.  My niece affects it; but she wants
features.  Is Sir Rowland handsome?  Let my toilet be
removed—I’ll dress above.  I’ll receive
Sir Rowland here.  Is he handsome?  Don’t answer
me.  I won’t know; I’ll be surprised. 
I’ll be taken by surprise.</p>
<p>FOIB.  By storm, madam.  Sir Rowland’s a brisk
man.</p>
<p>LADY.  Is he?  Oh, then, he’ll importune, if
he’s a brisk man.  I shall save decorums if Sir
Rowland importunes.  I have a mortal terror at the
apprehension of offending against decorums.  Oh, I’m
glad he’s a brisk man.  Let my things be removed, good
Foible.</p>
<h3>SCENE VI.</h3>
<p style="text-align: center"><span class="smcap">Mrs.
Fainall</span>, <span class="smcap">Foible</span>.</p>
<p>MRS. FAIN.  O Foible, I have been in a fright, lest I
should come too late.  That devil, Marwood, saw you in the
park with Mirabell, and I’m afraid will discover it to my
lady.</p>
<p>FOIB.  Discover what, madam?</p>
<p>MRS. FAIN.  Nay, nay, put not on that strange face. 
I am privy to the whole design, and know that Waitwell, to whom
thou wert this morning married, is to personate Mirabell’s
uncle, and, as such winning my lady, to involve her in those
difficulties from which Mirabell only must release her, by his
making his conditions to have my cousin and her fortune left to
her own disposal.</p>
<p>FOIB.  O dear madam, I beg your pardon.  It was not
my confidence in your ladyship that was deficient; but I thought
the former good correspondence between your ladyship and Mr.
Mirabell might have hindered his communicating this secret.</p>
<p>MRS. FAIN.  Dear Foible, forget that.</p>
<p>FOIB.  O dear madam, Mr. Mirabell is such a sweet winning
gentleman.  But your ladyship is the pattern of
generosity.  Sweet lady, to be so good!  Mr. Mirabell
cannot choose but be grateful.  I find your ladyship has his
heart still.  Now, madam, I can safely tell your ladyship
our success: Mrs. Marwood had told my lady, but I warrant I
managed myself.  I turned it all for the better.  I
told my lady that Mr. Mirabell railed at her.  I laid horrid
things to his charge, I’ll vow; and my lady is so incensed
that she’ll be contracted to Sir Rowland to-night, she
says; I warrant I worked her up that he may have her for asking
for, as they say of a Welsh maidenhead.</p>
<p>MRS. FAIN.  O rare Foible!</p>
<p>FOIB.  Madam, I beg your ladyship to acquaint Mr.
Mirabell of his success.  I would be seen as little as
possible to speak to him—besides, I believe Madam Marwood
watches me.  She has a month’s mind; but I know Mr.
Mirabell can’t abide her.  [<i>Calls</i>.]  John,
remove my lady’s toilet.  Madam, your servant. 
My lady is so impatient, I fear she’ll come for me, if I
stay.</p>
<p>MRS. FAIN.  I’ll go with you up the back stairs,
lest I should meet her.</p>
<h3>SCENE VII.</h3>
<p style="text-align: center"><span class="smcap">Mrs.
Marwood</span> <i>alone</i>.</p>
<p>MRS. MAR.  Indeed, Mrs. Engine, is it thus with
you?  Are you become a go-between of this importance? 
Yes, I shall watch you.  Why this wench is the
<i>passe-partout</i>, a very master-key to everybody’s
strong box.  My friend Fainall, have you carried it so
swimmingly?  I thought there was something in it; but it
seems it’s over with you.  Your loathing is not from a
want of appetite then, but from a surfeit.  Else you could
never be so cool to fall from a principal to be an assistant, to
procure for him!  A pattern of generosity, that I
confess.  Well, Mr. Fainall, you have met with your
match.—O man, man!  Woman, woman!  The
devil’s an ass: if I were a painter, I would draw him like
an idiot, a driveller with a bib and bells.  Man should have
his head and horns, and woman the rest of him.  Poor, simple
fiend!  ‘Madam Marwood has a month’s mind, but
he can’t abide her.’  ’Twere better for
him you had not been his confessor in that affair, without you
could have kept his counsel closer.  I shall not prove
another pattern of generosity; he has not obliged me to that with
those excesses of himself, and now I’ll have none of
him.  Here comes the good lady, panting ripe, with a heart
full of hope, and a head full of care, like any chymist upon the
day of projection.</p>
<h3>SCENE VIII.</h3>
<p style="text-align: center">[<i>To her</i>] <span class="smcap">Lady Wishfort</span>.</p>
<p>LADY.  O dear Marwood, what shall I say for this rude
forgetfulness?  But my dear friend is all goodness.</p>
<p>MRS. MAR.  No apologies, dear madam.  I have been
very well entertained.</p>
<p>LADY.  As I’m a person, I am in a very chaos to
think I should so forget myself.  But I have such an olio of
affairs, really I know not what to do. 
[<i>Calls</i>.]  Foible!—I expect my nephew Sir
Wilfull ev’ry moment too.—Why, Foible!—He means
to travel for improvement.</p>
<p>MRS. MAR.  Methinks Sir Wilfull should rather think of
marrying than travelling at his years.  I hear he is turned
of forty.</p>
<p>LADY.  Oh, he’s in less danger of being spoiled by
his travels.  I am against my nephew’s marrying too
young.  It will be time enough when he comes back, and has
acquired discretion to choose for himself.</p>
<p>MRS. MAR.  Methinks Mrs. Millamant and he would make a
very fit match.  He may travel afterwards.  ’Tis
a thing very usual with young gentlemen.</p>
<p>LADY.  I promise you I have thought on’t—and
since ’tis your judgment, I’ll think on’t
again.  I assure you I will; I value your judgment
extremely.  On my word, I’ll propose it.</p>
<h3>SCENE IX.</h3>
<p style="text-align: center">[<i>To them</i>] <span class="smcap">Foible</span>.</p>
<p>LADY.  Come, come, Foible—I had forgot my nephew
will be here before dinner—I must make haste.</p>
<p>FOIB.  Mr. Witwoud and Mr. Petulant are come to dine with
your ladyship.</p>
<p>LADY.  Oh dear, I can’t appear till I am
dressed.  Dear Marwood, shall I be free with you again, and
beg you to entertain ’em?  I’ll make all
imaginable haste.  Dear friend, excuse me.</p>
<h3>SCENE X.</h3>
<p style="text-align: center"><span class="smcap">Mrs.
Marwood</span>, <span class="smcap">Mrs. Millamant</span>, <span class="smcap">Mincing</span>.</p>
<p>MILLA.  Sure, never anything was so unbred as that odious
man.  Marwood, your servant.</p>
<p>MRS. MAR.  You have a colour; what’s the
matter?</p>
<p>MILLA.  That horrid fellow Petulant has provoked me into
a flame—I have broke my fan—Mincing, lend me
yours.—Is not all the powder out of my hair?</p>
<p>MRS. MAR.  No.  What has he done?</p>
<p>MILLA.  Nay, he has done nothing; he has only
talked.  Nay, he has said nothing neither; but he has
contradicted everything that has been said.  For my part, I
thought Witwoud and he would have quarrelled.</p>
<p>MINC.  I vow, mem, I thought once they would have
fit.</p>
<p>MILLA.  Well, ’tis a lamentable thing, I swear,
that one has not the liberty of choosing one’s acquaintance
as one does one’s clothes.</p>
<p>MRS. MAR.  If we had that liberty, we should be as weary
of one set of acquaintance, though never so good, as we are of
one suit, though never so fine.  A fool and a doily stuff
would now and then find days of grace, and be worn for
variety.</p>
<p>MILLA.  I could consent to wear ’em, if they would
wear alike; but fools never wear out.  They are such <i>drap
de Berri</i> things!  Without one could give ’em to
one’s chambermaid after a day or two.</p>
<p>MRS. MAR.  ’Twere better so indeed.  Or what
think you of the playhouse?  A fine gay glossy fool should
be given there, like a new masking habit, after the masquerade is
over, and we have done with the disguise.  For a
fool’s visit is always a disguise, and never admitted by a
woman of wit, but to blind her affair with a lover of
sense.  If you would but appear barefaced now, and own
Mirabell, you might as easily put off Petulant and Witwoud as
your hood and scarf.  And indeed ’tis time, for the
town has found it, the secret is grown too big for the
pretence.  ’Tis like Mrs. Primly’s great belly:
she may lace it down before, but it burnishes on her hips. 
Indeed, Millamant, you can no more conceal it than my Lady
Strammel can her face, that goodly face, which in defiance of her
Rhenish-wine tea will not be comprehended in a mask.</p>
<p>MILLA.  I’ll take my death, Marwood, you are more
censorious than a decayed beauty, or a discarded
toast:—Mincing, tell the men they may come up.  My
aunt is not dressing here; their folly is less provoking than
your malice.</p>
<h3>SCENE XI.</h3>
<p style="text-align: center"><span class="smcap">Mrs.
Millamant</span>, <span class="smcap">Mrs. Marwood</span>.</p>
<p>MILLA.  The town has found it?  What has it
found?  That Mirabell loves me is no more a secret than it
is a secret that you discovered it to my aunt, or than the reason
why you discovered it is a secret.</p>
<p>MRS. MAR.  You are nettled.</p>
<p>MILLA.  You’re mistaken.  Ridiculous!</p>
<p>MRS. MAR.  Indeed, my dear, you’ll tear another
fan, if you don’t mitigate those violent airs.</p>
<p>MILLA.  O silly!  Ha, ha, ha!  I could laugh
immoderately.  Poor Mirabell!  His constancy to me has
quite destroyed his complaisance for all the world beside. 
I swear I never enjoined it him to be so coy.  If I had the
vanity to think he would obey me, I would command him to show
more gallantry: ’tis hardly well-bred to be so particular
on one hand and so insensible on the other.  But I despair
to prevail, and so let him follow his own way.  Ha, ha,
ha!  Pardon me, dear creature, I must laugh; ha, ha,
ha!  Though I grant you ’tis a little barbarous; ha,
ha, ha!</p>
<p>MRS. MAR.  What pity ’tis so much fine raillery,
and delivered with so significant gesture, should be so unhappily
directed to miscarry.</p>
<p>MILLA.  Heh?  Dear creature, I ask your
pardon.  I swear I did not mind you.</p>
<p>MRS. MAR.  Mr. Mirabell and you both may think it a thing
impossible, when I shall tell him by telling you—</p>
<p>MILLA.  Oh dear, what?  For it is the same thing, if
I hear it.  Ha, ha, ha!</p>
<p>MRS. MAR.  That I detest him, hate him, madam.</p>
<p>MILLA.  O madam, why, so do I.  And yet the creature
loves me, ha, ha, ha!  How can one forbear laughing to think
of it?  I am a sibyl if I am not amazed to think what he can
see in me.  I’ll take my death, I think you are
handsomer, and within a year or two as young.  If you could
but stay for me, I should overtake you—but that cannot
be.  Well, that thought makes me melancholic.—Now
I’ll be sad.</p>
<p>MRS. MAR.  Your merry note may be changed sooner than you
think.</p>
<p>MILLA.  D’ye say so?  Then I’m resolved
I’ll have a song to keep up my spirits.</p>
<h3>SCENE XII.</h3>
<p style="text-align: center">[<i>To them</i>] <span class="smcap">Mincing</span>.</p>
<p>MINC.  The gentlemen stay but to comb, madam, and will
wait on you.</p>
<p>MILLA.  Desire Mrs. — that is in the next room, to
sing the song I would have learnt yesterday.  You shall hear
it, madam.  Not that there’s any great matter in
it—but ’tis agreeable to my humour.</p>
<p style="text-align: center">SONG.<br/>
Set by Mr. <span class="smcap">John Eccles</span>.</p>
<p style="text-align: center">I</p>
<p class="poetry">Love’s but the frailty of the mind<br/>
When ’tis not with ambition joined;<br/>
A sickly flame, which if not fed expires,<br/>
And feeding, wastes in self-consuming fires.</p>
<p style="text-align: center">II</p>
<p class="poetry">’Tis not to wound a wanton boy<br/>
Or am’rous youth, that gives the joy;<br/>
But ’tis the glory to have pierced a swain<br/>
For whom inferior beauties sighed in vain.</p>
<p style="text-align: center">III</p>
<p class="poetry">Then I alone the conquest prize,<br/>
When I insult a rival’s eyes;<br/>
If there’s delight in love, ’tis when I see<br/>
That heart, which others bleed for, bleed for me.</p>
<h3>SCENE XIII.</h3>
<p style="text-align: center">[<i>To them</i>] <span class="smcap">Petulant</span>, <span class="smcap">Witwoud</span>.</p>
<p>MILLA.  Is your animosity composed, gentlemen?</p>
<p>WIT.  Raillery, raillery, madam; we have no
animosity.  We hit off a little wit now and then, but no
animosity.  The falling out of wits is like the falling out
of lovers:—we agree in the main, like treble and
bass.  Ha, Petulant?</p>
<p>PET.  Ay, in the main.  But when I have a humour to
contradict—</p>
<p>WIT.  Ay, when he has a humour to contradict, then I
contradict too.  What, I know my cue.  Then we
contradict one another like two battledores; for contradictions
beget one another like Jews.</p>
<p>PET.  If he says black’s black—if I have a
humour to say ’tis blue—let that
pass—all’s one for that.  If I have a humour to
prove it, it must be granted.</p>
<p>WIT.  Not positively must.  But it may; it may.</p>
<p>PET.  Yes, it positively must, upon proof positive.</p>
<p>WIT.  Ay, upon proof positive it must; but upon proof
presumptive it only may.  That’s a logical distinction
now, madam.</p>
<p>MRS. MAR.  I perceive your debates are of importance, and
very learnedly handled.</p>
<p>PET.  Importance is one thing and learning’s
another; but a debate’s a debate, that I assert.</p>
<p>WIT.  Petulant’s an enemy to learning; he relies
altogether on his parts.</p>
<p>PET.  No, I’m no enemy to learning; it hurts not
me.</p>
<p>MRS. MAR.  That’s a sign, indeed, it’s no
enemy to you.</p>
<p>PET.  No, no, it’s no enemy to anybody but them
that have it.</p>
<p>MILLA.  Well, an illiterate man’s my aversion; I
wonder at the impudence of any illiterate man to offer to make
love.</p>
<p>WIT.  That I confess I wonder at, too.</p>
<p>MILLA.  Ah, to marry an ignorant that can hardly read or
write!</p>
<p>PET.  Why should a man be any further from being married,
though he can’t read, than he is from being hanged? 
The ordinary’s paid for setting the psalm, and the parish
priest for reading the ceremony.  And for the rest which is
to follow in both cases, a man may do it without book.  So
all’s one for that.</p>
<p>MILLA.  D’ye hear the creature?  Lord,
here’s company; I’ll begone.</p>
<h3>SCENE XIV.</h3>
<p style="text-align: center"><span class="smcap">Sir Wilfull
Witwoud</span> <i>in a riding dress</i>, <span class="smcap">Mrs.
Marwood</span>, <span class="smcap">Petulant</span>, <span class="smcap">Witwoud</span>, <span class="smcap">Footman</span>.</p>
<p>WIT.  In the name of Bartlemew and his Fair, what have we
here?</p>
<p>MRS. MAR.  ’Tis your brother, I fancy. 
Don’t you know him?</p>
<p>WIT.  Not I:—yes, I think it is he. 
I’ve almost forgot him; I have not seen him since the
revolution.</p>
<p>FOOT.  Sir, my lady’s dressing.  Here’s
company, if you please to walk in, in the meantime.</p>
<p>SIR WIL.  Dressing!  What, it’s but morning
here, I warrant, with you in London; we should count it towards
afternoon in our parts down in Shropshire:—why, then,
belike my aunt han’t dined yet.  Ha, friend?</p>
<p>FOOT.  Your aunt, sir?</p>
<p>SIR WIL.  My aunt, sir?  Yes my aunt, sir, and your
lady, sir; your lady is my aunt, sir.  Why, what dost thou
not know me, friend?  Why, then, send somebody hither that
does.  How long hast thou lived with thy lady, fellow,
ha?</p>
<p>FOOT.  A week, sir; longer than anybody in the house,
except my lady’s woman.</p>
<p>SIR WIL.  Why, then, belike thou dost not know thy lady,
if thou seest her.  Ha, friend?</p>
<p>FOOT.  Why, truly, sir, I cannot safely swear to her face
in a morning, before she is dressed.  ’Tis like I may
give a shrewd guess at her by this time.</p>
<p>SIR WIL.  Well, prithee try what thou canst do; if thou
canst not guess, enquire her out, dost hear, fellow?  And
tell her her nephew, Sir Wilfull Witwoud, is in the house.</p>
<p>FOOT.  I shall, sir.</p>
<p>SIR WIL.  Hold ye, hear me, friend, a word with you in
your ear: prithee who are these gallants?</p>
<p>FOOT.  Really, sir, I can’t tell; here come so many
here, ’tis hard to know ’em all.</p>
<h3>SCENE XV.</h3>
<p style="text-align: center"><span class="smcap">Sir Wilfull
Witwoud</span>, <span class="smcap">Petulant</span>, <span class="smcap">Witwoud</span>, <span class="smcap">Mrs.
Marwood</span>.</p>
<p>SIR WIL.  Oons, this fellow knows less than a starling: I
don’t think a knows his own name.</p>
<p>MRS. MAR.  Mr. Witwoud, your brother is not behindhand in
forgetfulness.  I fancy he has forgot you too.</p>
<p>WIT.  I hope so.  The devil take him that remembers
first, I say.</p>
<p>SIR WIL.  Save you, gentlemen and lady.</p>
<p>MRS. MAR.  For shame, Mr. Witwoud; why won’t you
speak to him?—And you, sir.</p>
<p>WIT.  Petulant, speak.</p>
<p>PET.  And you, sir.</p>
<p>SIR WIL.  No offence, I hope?  [<i>Salutes</i> <span class="smcap">Marwood</span>.]</p>
<p>MRS. MAR.  No, sure, sir.</p>
<p>WIT.  This is a vile dog, I see that already.  No
offence?  Ha, ha, ha.  To him, to him, Petulant, smoke
him.</p>
<p>PET.  It seems as if you had come a journey, sir; hem,
hem.  [<i>Surveying him round</i>.]</p>
<p>SIR WIL.  Very likely, sir, that it may seem so.</p>
<p>PET.  No offence, I hope, sir?</p>
<p>WIT.  Smoke the boots, the boots, Petulant, the boots;
ha, ha, ha!</p>
<p>SIR WILL.  Maybe not, sir; thereafter as ’tis
meant, sir.</p>
<p>PET.  Sir, I presume upon the information of your
boots.</p>
<p>SIR WIL.  Why, ’tis like you may, sir: if you are
not satisfied with the information of my boots, sir, if you will
step to the stable, you may enquire further of my horse, sir.</p>
<p>PET.  Your horse, sir!  Your horse is an ass,
sir!</p>
<p>SIR WIL.  Do you speak by way of offence, sir?</p>
<p>MRS. MAR.  The gentleman’s merry, that’s all,
sir.  ’Slife, we shall have a quarrel betwixt an horse
and an ass, before they find one another out.—You must not
take anything amiss from your friends, sir.  You are among
your friends here, though it—may be you don’t know
it.  If I am not mistaken, you are Sir Wilfull Witwoud?</p>
<p>SIR WIL.  Right, lady; I am Sir Wilfull Witwoud, so I
write myself; no offence to anybody, I hope? and nephew to the
Lady Wishfort of this mansion.</p>
<p>MRS. MAR.  Don’t you know this gentleman, sir?</p>
<p>SIR WIL.  Hum!  What, sure ’tis not—yea
by’r lady but ’tis—’sheart, I know not
whether ’tis or no.  Yea, but ’tis, by the
Wrekin.  Brother Antony!  What, Tony,
i’faith!  What, dost thou not know me? 
By’r lady, nor I thee, thou art so becravated and so
beperiwigged.  ’Sheart, why dost not speak?  Art
thou o’erjoyed?</p>
<p>WIT.  Odso, brother, is it you?  Your servant,
brother.</p>
<p>SIR WIL.  Your servant?  Why, yours, sir.  Your
servant again—’sheart, and your friend and servant to
that—and a—[<i>puff</i>] and a flap-dragon for your
service, sir, and a hare’s foot and a hare’s scut for
your service, sir, an you be so cold and so courtly!</p>
<p>WIT.  No offence, I hope, brother?</p>
<p>SIR WIL.  ’Sheart, sir, but there is, and much
offence.  A pox, is this your inns o’ court breeding,
not to know your friends and your relations, your elders, and
your betters?</p>
<p>WIT.  Why, brother Wilfull of Salop, you may be as short
as a Shrewsbury cake, if you please.  But I tell you
’tis not modish to know relations in town.  You think
you’re in the country, where great lubberly brothers
slabber and kiss one another when they meet, like a call of
sergeants.  ’Tis not the fashion here; ’tis not,
indeed, dear brother.</p>
<p>SIR WIL.  The fashion’s a fool and you’re a
fop, dear brother.  ’Sheart, I’ve suspected
this—by’r lady I conjectured you were a fop, since
you began to change the style of your letters, and write in a
scrap of paper gilt round the edges, no bigger than a
subpoena.  I might expect this when you left off
‘Honoured brother,’ and ‘Hoping you are in good
health,’ and so forth, to begin with a ‘Rat me,
knight, I’m so sick of a last night’s
debauch.’  Ods heart, and then tell a familiar tale of
a cock and a bull, and a whore and a bottle, and so
conclude.  You could write news before you were out of your
time, when you lived with honest Pumple-Nose, the attorney of
Furnival’s Inn.  You could intreat to be remembered
then to your friends round the Wrekin.  We could have
Gazettes then, and Dawks’s Letter, and the Weekly Bill,
till of late days.</p>
<p>PET.  ’Slife, Witwoud, were you ever an
attorney’s clerk?  Of the family of the
Furnivals?  Ha, ha, ha!</p>
<p>WIT.  Ay, ay, but that was but for a while.  Not
long, not long; pshaw, I was not in my own power then.  An
orphan, and this fellow was my guardian; ay, ay, I was glad to
consent to that man to come to London.  He had the disposal
of me then.  If I had not agreed to that, I might have been
bound prentice to a feltmaker in Shrewsbury: this fellow would
have bound me to a maker of felts.</p>
<p>SIR WIL.  ’Sheart, and better than to be bound to a
maker of fops, where, I suppose, you have served your time, and
now you may set up for yourself.</p>
<p>MRS. MAR.  You intend to travel, sir, as I’m
informed?</p>
<p>SIR WIL.  Belike I may, madam.  I may chance to sail
upon the salt seas, if my mind hold.</p>
<p>PET.  And the wind serve.</p>
<p>SIR WIL.  Serve or not serve, I shan’t ask license
of you, sir, nor the weathercock your companion.  I direct
my discourse to the lady, sir.  ’Tis like my aunt may
have told you, madam?  Yes, I have settled my concerns, I
may say now, and am minded to see foreign parts.  If an how
that the peace holds, whereby, that is, taxes abate.</p>
<p>MRS. MAR.  I thought you had designed for France at all
adventures.</p>
<p>SIR WIL.  I can’t tell that; ’tis like I may,
and ’tis like I may not.  I am somewhat dainty in
making a resolution, because when I make it I keep it.  I
don’t stand shill I, shall I, then; if I say’t,
I’ll do’t.  But I have thoughts to tarry a small
matter in town, to learn somewhat of your lingo first, before I
cross the seas.  I’d gladly have a spice of your
French as they say, whereby to hold discourse in foreign
countries.</p>
<p>MRS. MAR.  Here’s an academy in town for that
use.</p>
<p>SIR WIL.  There is?  ’Tis like there may.</p>
<p>MRS. MAR.  No doubt you will return very much
improved.</p>
<p>WIT.  Yes, refined like a Dutch skipper from a
whale-fishing.</p>
<h3>SCENE XVI.</h3>
<p style="text-align: center">[<i>To them</i>] <span class="smcap">Lady Wishfort</span> <i>and</i> <span class="smcap">Fainall</span>.</p>
<p>LADY.  Nephew, you are welcome.</p>
<p>SIR WIL.  Aunt, your servant.</p>
<p>FAIN.  Sir Wilfull, your most faithful servant.</p>
<p>SIR WIL.  Cousin Fainall, give me your hand.</p>
<p>LADY.  Cousin Witwoud, your servant; Mr. Petulant, your
servant.  Nephew, you are welcome again.  Will you
drink anything after your journey, nephew, before you eat? 
Dinner’s almost ready.</p>
<p>SIR WIL.  I’m very well, I thank you, aunt. 
However, I thank you for your courteous offer. 
’Sheart, I was afraid you would have been in the fashion
too, and have remembered to have forgot your relations. 
Here’s your cousin Tony, belike, I mayn’t call him
brother for fear of offence.</p>
<p>LADY.  Oh, he’s a rallier, nephew.  My
cousin’s a wit: and your great wits always rally their best
friends to choose.  When you have been abroad, nephew,
you’ll understand raillery better.  [<span class="smcap">Fainall</span> <i>and</i> <span class="smcap">Mrs.
Marwood</span> <i>talk apart</i>.]</p>
<p>SIR WIL.  Why, then, let him hold his tongue in the
meantime, and rail when that day comes.</p>
<h3>SCENE XVII.</h3>
<p style="text-align: center">[<i>To them</i>] <span class="smcap">Mincing</span>.</p>
<p>MINC.  Mem, I come to acquaint your laship that dinner is
impatient.</p>
<p>SIR WIL.  Impatient?  Why, then, belike it
won’t stay till I pull off my boots.  Sweetheart, can
you help me to a pair of slippers?  My man’s with his
horses, I warrant.</p>
<p>LADY.  Fie, fie, nephew, you would not pull off your
boots here?  Go down into the hall:—dinner shall stay
for you.  My nephew’s a little unbred: you’ll
pardon him, madam.  Gentlemen, will you walk? 
Marwood?</p>
<p>MRS. MAR.  I’ll follow you, madam,—before Sir
Wilfull is ready.</p>
<h3>SCENE XVIII.</h3>
<p style="text-align: center"><span class="smcap">Mrs.
Marwood</span>, <span class="smcap">Fainall</span>.</p>
<p>FAIN.  Why, then, Foible’s a bawd, an errant, rank
match-making bawd.  And I, it seems, am a husband, a rank
husband, and my wife a very errant, rank wife,—all in the
way of the world.  ’Sdeath, to be a cuckold by
anticipation, a cuckold in embryo!  Sure I was born with
budding antlers like a young satyr, or a citizen’s child,
’sdeath, to be out-witted, to be out-jilted,
out-matrimonied.  If I had kept my speed like a stag,
’twere somewhat, but to crawl after, with my horns like a
snail, and be outstripped by my wife—’tis scurvy
wedlock.</p>
<p>MRS. MAR.  Then shake it off: you have often wished for
an opportunity to part, and now you have it.  But first
prevent their plot:—the half of Millamant’s fortune
is too considerable to be parted with to a foe, to Mirabell.</p>
<p>FAIN.  Damn him, that had been mine—had you not
made that fond discovery.  That had been forfeited, had they
been married.  My wife had added lustre to my horns by that
increase of fortune: I could have worn ’em tipt with gold,
though my forehead had been furnished like a
deputy-lieutenant’s hall.</p>
<p>MRS. MAR.  They may prove a cap of maintenance to you
still, if you can away with your wife.  And she’s no
worse than when you had her:—I dare swear she had given up
her game before she was married.</p>
<p>FAIN.  Hum!  That may be—</p>
<p>MRS. MAR.  You married her to keep you; and if you can
contrive to have her keep you better than you expected, why
should you not keep her longer than you intended?</p>
<p>FAIN.  The means, the means?</p>
<p>MRS. MAR.  Discover to my lady your wife’s conduct;
threaten to part with her.  My lady loves her, and will come
to any composition to save her reputation.  Take the
opportunity of breaking it just upon the discovery of this
imposture.  My lady will be enraged beyond bounds, and
sacrifice niece, and fortune and all at that conjuncture. 
And let me alone to keep her warm: if she should flag in her
part, I will not fail to prompt her.</p>
<p>FAIN.  Faith, this has an appearance.</p>
<p>MRS. MAR.  I’m sorry I hinted to my lady to
endeavour a match between Millamant and Sir Wilfull; that may be
an obstacle.</p>
<p>FAIN.  Oh, for that matter, leave me to manage him;
I’ll disable him for that, he will drink like a Dane. 
After dinner I’ll set his hand in.</p>
<p>MRS. MAR.  Well, how do you stand affected towards your
lady?</p>
<p>FAIN.  Why, faith, I’m thinking of it.  Let me
see.  I am married already; so that’s over.  My
wife has played the jade with me; well, that’s over
too.  I never loved her, or if I had, why that would have
been over too by this time.  Jealous of her I cannot be, for
I am certain; so there’s an end of jealousy.  Weary of
her I am and shall be.  No, there’s no end of that;
no, no, that were too much to hope.  Thus far concerning my
repose.  Now for my reputation: as to my own, I married not
for it; so that’s out of the question.  And as to my
part in my wife’s—why, she had parted with hers
before; so, bringing none to me, she can take none from me:
’tis against all rule of play that I should lose to one who
has not wherewithal to stake.</p>
<p>MRS. MAR.  Besides you forget, marriage is
honourable.</p>
<p>FAIN.  Hum!  Faith, and that’s well thought
on: marriage is honourable, as you say; and if so, wherefore
should cuckoldom be a discredit, being derived from so honourable
a root?</p>
<p>MRS. MAR.  Nay, I know not; if the root be honourable,
why not the branches?</p>
<p>FAIN.  So, so; why this point’s clear.  Well,
how do we proceed?</p>
<p>MRS. MAR.  I will contrive a letter which shall be
delivered to my lady at the time when that rascal who is to act
Sir Rowland is with her.  It shall come as from an unknown
hand—for the less I appear to know of the truth the better
I can play the incendiary.  Besides, I would not have Foible
provoked if I could help it, because, you know, she knows some
passages.  Nay, I expect all will come out.  But let
the mine be sprung first, and then I care not if I am
discovered.</p>
<p>FAIN.  If the worst come to the worst, I’ll turn my
wife to grass.  I have already a deed of settlement of the
best part of her estate, which I wheedled out of her, and that
you shall partake at least.</p>
<p>MRS. MAR.  I hope you are convinced that I hate Mirabell
now?  You’ll be no more jealous?</p>
<p>FAIN.  Jealous?  No, by this kiss.  Let
husbands be jealous, but let the lover still believe: or if he
doubt, let it be only to endear his pleasure, and prepare the joy
that follows, when he proves his mistress true.  But let
husbands’ doubts convert to endless jealousy; or if they
have belief, let it corrupt to superstition and blind
credulity.  I am single and will herd no more with
’em.  True, I wear the badge, but I’ll disown
the order.  And since I take my leave of ’em, I care
not if I leave ’em a common motto to their common
crest.</p>
<p class="poetry">All husbands must or pain or shame endure;<br/>
The wise too jealous are, fools too secure.</p>
<h2>ACT IV.—SCENE I.</h2>
<p style="text-align: center"><i>Scene Continues</i>.</p>
<p style="text-align: center"><span class="smcap">Lady
Wishfort</span> <i>and</i> <span class="smcap">Foible</span>.</p>
<p>LADY.  Is Sir Rowland coming, say’st thou,
Foible?  And are things in order?</p>
<p>FOIB.  Yes, madam.  I have put wax-lights in the
sconces, and placed the footmen in a row in the hall, in their
best liveries, with the coachman and postillion to fill up the
equipage.</p>
<p>LADY.  Have you pulvilled the coachman and postillion,
that they may not stink of the stable when Sir Rowland comes
by?</p>
<p>FOIB.  Yes, madam.</p>
<p>LADY.  And are the dancers and the music ready, that he
may be entertained in all points with correspondence to his
passion?</p>
<p>FOIB.  All is ready, madam.</p>
<p>LADY.  And—well—and how do I look,
Foible?</p>
<p>FOIB.  Most killing well, madam.</p>
<p>LADY.  Well, and how shall I receive him?  In what
figure shall I give his heart the first impression?  There
is a great deal in the first impression.  Shall I sit? 
No, I won’t sit, I’ll walk,—ay, I’ll walk
from the door upon his entrance, and then turn full upon
him.  No, that will be too sudden.  I’ll
lie,—ay, I’ll lie down.  I’ll receive him
in my little dressing-room; there’s a couch—yes, yes,
I’ll give the first impression on a couch.  I
won’t lie neither, but loll and lean upon one elbow, with
one foot a little dangling off, jogging in a thoughtful
way.  Yes; and then as soon as he appears, start, ay, start
and be surprised, and rise to meet him in a pretty
disorder.  Yes; oh, nothing is more alluring than a levee
from a couch in some confusion.  It shows the foot to
advantage, and furnishes with blushes and re-composing airs
beyond comparison.  Hark!  There’s a coach.</p>
<p>FOIB.  ’Tis he, madam.</p>
<p>LADY.  Oh dear, has my nephew made his addresses to
Millamant?  I ordered him.</p>
<p>FOIB.  Sir Wilfull is set in to drinking, madam, in the
parlour.</p>
<p>LADY.  Ods my life, I’ll send him to her. 
Call her down, Foible; bring her hither.  I’ll send
him as I go.  When they are together, then come to me,
Foible, that I may not be too long alone with Sir Rowland.</p>
<h3>SCENE II.</h3>
<p style="text-align: center"><span class="smcap">Mrs.
Millamant</span>, <span class="smcap">Mrs. Fainall</span>, <span class="smcap">Foible</span>.</p>
<p>FOIB.  Madam, I stayed here to tell your ladyship that
Mr. Mirabell has waited this half hour for an opportunity to talk
with you; though my lady’s orders were to leave you and Sir
Wilfull together.  Shall I tell Mr. Mirabell that you are at
leisure?</p>
<p>MILLA.  No.  What would the dear man have?  I
am thoughtful and would amuse myself; bid him come another
time.</p>
<p class="poetry">There never yet was woman made,<br/>
Nor shall, but to be cursed.</p>
<p style="text-align: right">[<i>Repeating and walking
about</i>.]</p>
<p>That’s hard!</p>
<p>MRS. FAIN.  You are very fond of Sir John Suckling
to-day, Millamant, and the poets.</p>
<p>MILLA.  He?  Ay, and filthy verses.  So I
am.</p>
<p>FOIB.  Sir Wilfull is coming, madam.  Shall I send
Mr. Mirabell away?</p>
<p>MILLA.  Ay, if you please, Foible, send him away, or send
him hither, just as you will, dear Foible.  I think
I’ll see him.  Shall I?  Ay, let the wretch
come.</p>
<p class="poetry">Thyrsis, a youth of the inspired train.</p>
<p style="text-align: right">[<i>Repeating</i>]</p>
<p>Dear Fainall, entertain Sir Wilfull:—thou hast
philosophy to undergo a fool; thou art married and hast
patience.  I would confer with my own thoughts.</p>
<p>MRS. FAIN.  I am obliged to you that you would make me
your proxy in this affair, but I have business of my own.</p>
<h3>SCENE III.</h3>
<p style="text-align: center">[<i>To them</i>] <span class="smcap">Sir Wilfull</span>.</p>
<p>MRS. FAIN.  O Sir Wilfull, you are come at the critical
instant.  There’s your mistress up to the ears in love
and contemplation; pursue your point, now or never.</p>
<p>SIR WIL.  Yes, my aunt will have it so.  I would
gladly have been encouraged with a bottle or two, because
I’m somewhat wary at first, before I am acquainted. 
[<i>This while</i> <span class="smcap">Millamant</span> <i>walks
about repeating to herself</i>.]  But I hope, after a time,
I shall break my mind—that is, upon further
acquaintance.—So for the present, cousin, I’ll take
my leave.  If so be you’ll be so kind to make my
excuse, I’ll return to my company—</p>
<p>MRS. FAIN.  Oh, fie, Sir Wilfull!  What, you must
not be daunted.</p>
<p>SIR WIL.  Daunted?  No, that’s not it; it is
not so much for that—for if so be that I set on’t
I’ll do’t.  But only for the present, ’tis
sufficient till further acquaintance, that’s all—your
servant.</p>
<p>MRS. FAIN.  Nay, I’ll swear you shall never lose so
favourable an opportunity, if I can help it.  I’ll
leave you together and lock the door.</p>
<h3>SCENE IV.</h3>
<p style="text-align: center"><span class="smcap">Sir
Wilfull</span>, <span class="smcap">Millamant</span>.</p>
<p>SIR WIL.  Nay, nay, cousin.  I have forgot my
gloves.  What d’ye do?  ’Sheart, a has
locked the door indeed, I think.—Nay, cousin Fainall, open
the door.  Pshaw, what a vixen trick is this?  Nay, now
a has seen me too.—Cousin, I made bold to pass through as
it were—I think this door’s enchanted.</p>
<p>MILLA.  [<i>repeating</i>]:—</p>
<p class="poetry">I prithee spare me, gentle boy,<br/>
Press me no more for that slight toy.</p>
<p>SIR WIL.  Anan?  Cousin, your servant.</p>
<p>MILLA.  That foolish trifle of a heart—</p>
<p>Sir Wilfull!</p>
<p>SIR WIL.  Yes—your servant.  No offence, I
hope, cousin?</p>
<p>MILLA.  [<i>repeating</i>]:—</p>
<p class="poetry">   I swear it will not do its
part,<br/>
Though thou dost thine, employ’st thy power and art.</p>
<p>Natural, easy Suckling!</p>
<p>SIR WIL.  Anan?  Suckling?  No such suckling
neither, cousin, nor stripling: I thank heaven I’m no
minor.</p>
<p>MILLA.  Ah, rustic, ruder than Gothic.</p>
<p>SIR WIL.  Well, well, I shall understand your lingo one
of these days, cousin; in the meanwhile I must answer in plain
English.</p>
<p>MILLA.  Have you any business with me, Sir Wilfull?</p>
<p>SIR WIL.  Not at present, cousin.  Yes, I made bold
to see, to come and know if that how you were disposed to fetch a
walk this evening; if so be that I might not be troublesome, I
would have sought a walk with you.</p>
<p>MILLA.  A walk?  What then?</p>
<p>SIR WIL.  Nay, nothing.  Only for the walk’s
sake, that’s all.</p>
<p>MILLA.  I nauseate walking: ’tis a country
diversion; I loathe the country and everything that relates to
it.</p>
<p>SIR WIL.  Indeed!  Hah!  Look ye, look ye, you
do?  Nay, ’tis like you may.  Here are choice of
pastimes here in town, as plays and the like, that must be
confessed indeed—</p>
<p>MILLA.  Ah, <i>l’étourdi</i>!  I hate
the town too.</p>
<p>SIR WIL.  Dear heart, that’s much.  Hah! that
you should hate ’em both!  Hah! ’tis like you
may!  There are some can’t relish the town, and others
can’t away with the country, ’tis like you may be one
of those, cousin.</p>
<p>MILLA.  Ha, ha, ha!  Yes, ’tis like I
may.  You have nothing further to say to me?</p>
<p>SIR WIL.  Not at present, cousin.  ’Tis like
when I have an opportunity to be more private—I may break
my mind in some measure—I conjecture you partly
guess.  However, that’s as time shall try.  But
spare to speak and spare to speed, as they say.</p>
<p>MILLA.  If it is of no great importance, Sir Wilfull, you
will oblige me to leave me: I have just now a little
business.</p>
<p>SIR WIL.  Enough, enough, cousin.  Yes, yes, all a
case.  When you’re disposed, when you’re
disposed.  Now’s as well as another time; and another
time as well as now.  All’s one for that.  Yes,
yes; if your concerns call you, there’s no haste: it will
keep cold as they say.  Cousin, your servant.  I think
this door’s locked.</p>
<p>MILLA.  You may go this way, sir.</p>
<p>SIR WIL.  Your servant; then with your leave I’ll
return to my company.</p>
<p>MILLA.  Ay, ay; ha, ha, ha!</p>
<p class="poetry" style="text-align: center">Like Phœbus
sung the no less am’rous boy.</p>
<h3>SCENE V.</h3>
<p style="text-align: center"><span class="smcap">Mrs.
Millamant</span>, <span class="smcap">Mirabell</span>.</p>
<p>MIRA.  Like Daphne she, as lovely and as coy.</p>
<p>Do you lock yourself up from me, to make my search more
curious?  Or is this pretty artifice contrived, to signify
that here the chase must end, and my pursuit be crowned, for you
can fly no further?</p>
<p>MILLA.  Vanity!  No—I’ll fly and be
followed to the last moment; though I am upon the very verge of
matrimony, I expect you should solicit me as much as if I were
wavering at the grate of a monastery, with one foot over the
threshold.  I’ll be solicited to the very last; nay,
and afterwards.</p>
<p>MIRA.  What, after the last?</p>
<p>MILLA.  Oh, I should think I was poor and had nothing to
bestow if I were reduced to an inglorious ease, and freed from
the agreeable fatigues of solicitation.</p>
<p>MIRA.  But do not you know that when favours are
conferred upon instant and tedious solicitation, that they
diminish in their value, and that both the giver loses the grace,
and the receiver lessens his pleasure?</p>
<p>MILLA.  It may be in things of common application, but
never, sure, in love.  Oh, I hate a lover that can dare to
think he draws a moment’s air independent on the bounty of
his mistress.  There is not so impudent a thing in nature as
the saucy look of an assured man confident of success: the
pedantic arrogance of a very husband has not so pragmatical an
air.  Ah, I’ll never marry, unless I am first made
sure of my will and pleasure.</p>
<p>MIRA.  Would you have ’em both before
marriage?  Or will you be contented with the first now, and
stay for the other till after grace?</p>
<p>MILLA.  Ah, don’t be impertinent.  My dear
liberty, shall I leave thee?  My faithful solitude, my
darling contemplation, must I bid you then adieu?  Ay-h,
adieu.  My morning thoughts, agreeable wakings, indolent
slumbers, all ye <i>douceurs</i>, ye <i>sommeils du matin</i>,
adieu.  I can’t do’t, ’tis more than
impossible—positively, Mirabell, I’ll lie a-bed in a
morning as long as I please.</p>
<p>MI RA.  Then I’ll get up in a morning as early as I
please.</p>
<p>MILLA.  Ah!  Idle creature, get up when you
will.  And d’ye hear, I won’t be called names
after I’m married; positively I won’t be called
names.</p>
<p>MIRA.  Names?</p>
<p>MILLA.  Ay, as wife, spouse, my dear, joy, jewel, love,
sweetheart, and the rest of that nauseous cant, in which men and
their wives are so fulsomely familiar—I shall never bear
that.  Good Mirabell, don’t let us be familiar or
fond, nor kiss before folks, like my Lady Fadler and Sir Francis;
nor go to Hyde Park together the first Sunday in a new chariot,
to provoke eyes and whispers, and then never be seen there
together again, as if we were proud of one another the first
week, and ashamed of one another ever after.  Let us never
visit together, nor go to a play together, but let us be very
strange and well-bred.  Let us be as strange as if we had
been married a great while, and as well-bred as if we were not
married at all.</p>
<p>MIRA.  Have you any more conditions to offer? 
Hitherto your demands are pretty reasonable.</p>
<p>MILLA.  Trifles; as liberty to pay and receive visits to
and from whom I please; to write and receive letters, without
interrogatories or wry faces on your part; to wear what I please,
and choose conversation with regard only to my own taste; to have
no obligation upon me to converse with wits that I don’t
like, because they are your acquaintance, or to be intimate with
fools, because they may be your relations.  Come to dinner
when I please, dine in my dressing-room when I’m out of
humour, without giving a reason.  To have my closet
inviolate; to be sole empress of my tea-table, which you must
never presume to approach without first asking leave.  And
lastly, wherever I am, you shall always knock at the door before
you come in.  These articles subscribed, if I continue to
endure you a little longer, I may by degrees dwindle into a
wife.</p>
<p>MIRA.  Your bill of fare is something advanced in this
latter account.  Well, have I liberty to offer
conditions:—that when you are dwindled into a wife, I may
not be beyond measure enlarged into a husband?</p>
<p>MILLA.  You have free leave: propose your utmost, speak
and spare not.</p>
<p>MIRA.  I thank you.  <i>Imprimis</i>, then, I
covenant that your acquaintance be general; that you admit no
sworn confidant or intimate of your own sex; no she friend to
screen her affairs under your countenance, and tempt you to make
trial of a mutual secrecy.  No decoy-duck to wheedle you a
<i>fop-scrambling</i> to the play in a mask, then bring you home
in a pretended fright, when you think you shall be found out, and
rail at me for missing the play, and disappointing the frolic
which you had to pick me up and prove my constancy.</p>
<p>MILLA.  Detestable <i>imprimis</i>!  I go to the
play in a mask!</p>
<p>MIRA.  <i>Item</i>, I article, that you continue to like
your own face as long as I shall, and while it passes current
with me, that you endeavour not to new coin it.  To which
end, together with all vizards for the day, I prohibit all masks
for the night, made of oiled skins and I know not
what—hog’s bones, hare’s gall, pig water, and
the marrow of a roasted cat.  In short, I forbid all
commerce with the gentlewomen in what-d’ye-call-it
court.  <i>Item</i>, I shut my doors against all bawds with
baskets, and pennyworths of muslin, china, fans, atlases,
etc.  <i>Item</i>, when you shall be breeding—</p>
<p>MILLA.  Ah, name it not!</p>
<p>MIRA.  Which may be presumed, with a blessing on our
endeavours—</p>
<p>MILLA.  Odious endeavours!</p>
<p>MIRA.  I denounce against all strait lacing, squeezing
for a shape, till you mould my boy’s head like a
sugar-loaf, and instead of a man-child, make me father to a
crooked billet.  Lastly, to the dominion of the tea-table I
submit; but with proviso, that you exceed not in your province,
but restrain yourself to native and simple tea-table drinks, as
tea, chocolate, and coffee.  As likewise to genuine and
authorised tea-table talk, such as mending of fashions, spoiling
reputations, railing at absent friends, and so forth.  But
that on no account you encroach upon the men’s prerogative,
and presume to drink healths, or toast fellows; for prevention of
which, I banish all foreign forces, all auxiliaries to the
tea-table, as orange-brandy, all aniseed, cinnamon, citron, and
Barbadoes waters, together with ratafia and the most noble spirit
of clary.  But for cowslip-wine, poppy-water, and all
dormitives, those I allow.  These provisos admitted, in
other things I may prove a tractable and complying husband.</p>
<p>MILLA.  Oh, horrid provisos!  Filthy strong
waters!  I toast fellows, odious men!  I hate your
odious provisos.</p>
<p>MIRA.  Then we’re agreed.  Shall I kiss your
hand upon the contract?  And here comes one to be a witness
to the sealing of the deed.</p>
<h3>SCENE VI.</h3>
<p style="text-align: center">[<i>To them</i>] <span class="smcap">Mrs. Fainall</span>.</p>
<p>MILLA.  Fainall, what shall I do?  Shall I have
him?  I think I must have him.</p>
<p>MRS. FAIN.  Ay, ay, take him, take him, what should you
do?</p>
<p>MILLA.  Well then—I’ll take my death
I’m in a horrid fright—Fainall, I shall never say
it.  Well—I think—I’ll endure you.</p>
<p>MRS. FAIN.  Fie, fie, have him, and tell him so in plain
terms: for I am sure you have a mind to him.</p>
<p>MILLA.  Are you?  I think I have; and the horrid man
looks as if he thought so too.  Well, you ridiculous thing
you, I’ll have you.  I won’t be kissed, nor I
won’t be thanked.—Here, kiss my hand though, so hold
your tongue now; don’t say a word.</p>
<p>MRS. FAIN.  Mirabell, there’s a necessity for your
obedience: you have neither time to talk nor stay.  My
mother is coming; and in my conscience if she should see you,
would fall into fits, and maybe not recover time enough to return
to Sir Rowland, who, as Foible tells me, is in a fair way to
succeed.  Therefore spare your ecstasies for another
occasion, and slip down the back stairs, where Foible waits to
consult you.</p>
<p>MILLA.  Ay, go, go.  In the meantime I suppose you
have said something to please me.</p>
<p>MIRA.  I am all obedience.</p>
<h3>SCENE VII.</h3>
<p style="text-align: center"><span class="smcap">Mrs.
Millamant</span>, <span class="smcap">Mrs. Fainall</span>.</p>
<p>MRS. FAIN.  Yonder Sir Wilfull’s drunk, and so
noisy that my mother has been forced to leave Sir Rowland to
appease him; but he answers her only with singing and
drinking.  What they may have done by this time I know not,
but Petulant and he were upon quarrelling as I came by.</p>
<p>MILLA.  Well, if Mirabell should not make a good husband,
I am a lost thing: for I find I love him violently.</p>
<p>MRS. FAIN.  So it seems; for you mind not what’s
said to you.  If you doubt him, you had best take up with
Sir Wilfull.</p>
<p>MILLA.  How can you name that superannuated lubber?
foh!</p>
<h3>SCENE VIII.</h3>
<p style="text-align: center">[<i>To them</i>] <span class="smcap">Witwoud</span> <i>from drinking</i>.</p>
<p>MRS. FAIN.  So, is the fray made up that you have left
’em?</p>
<p>WIT.  Left ’em?  I could stay no longer. 
I have laughed like ten Christ’nings.  I am tipsy with
laughing—if I had stayed any longer I should have
burst,—I must have been let out and pieced in the sides
like an unsized camlet.  Yes, yes, the fray is composed; my
lady came in like a <i>noli prosequi</i>, and stopt the
proceedings.</p>
<p>MILLA.  What was the dispute?</p>
<p>WIT.  That’s the jest: there was no dispute. 
They could neither of ’em speak for rage; and so fell a
sputt’ring at one another like two roasting apples.</p>
<h3>SCENE IX.</h3>
<p style="text-align: center">[<i>To them</i>] <span class="smcap">Petulant</span> <i>drunk</i>.</p>
<p>WIT.  Now, Petulant?  All’s over, all’s
well?  Gad, my head begins to whim it about.  Why dost
thou not speak?  Thou art both as drunk and as mute as a
fish.</p>
<p>PET.  Look you, Mrs. Millamant, if you can love me, dear
Nymph, say it, and that’s the conclusion—pass on, or
pass off—that’s all.</p>
<p>WIT.  Thou hast uttered volumes, folios, in less than
decimo sexto, my dear Lacedemonian.  Sirrah, Petulant, thou
art an epitomiser of words.</p>
<p>PET.  Witwoud,—you are an annihilator of sense.</p>
<p>WIT.  Thou art a retailer of phrases, and dost deal in
remnants of remnants, like a maker of pincushions; thou art in
truth (metaphorically speaking) a speaker of shorthand.</p>
<p>PET.  Thou art (without a figure) just one half of an
ass, and Baldwin yonder, thy half-brother, is the rest.  A
Gemini of asses split would make just four of you.</p>
<p>WIT.  Thou dost bite, my dear mustard-seed; kiss me for
that.</p>
<p>PET.  Stand off—I’ll kiss no more
males—I have kissed your Twin yonder in a humour of
reconciliation till he [<i>hiccup</i>] rises upon my stomach like
a radish.</p>
<p>MILLA.  Eh! filthy creature; what was the quarrel?</p>
<p>PET.  There was no quarrel; there might have been a
quarrel.</p>
<p>WIT.  If there had been words enow between ’em to
have expressed provocation, they had gone together by the ears
like a pair of castanets.</p>
<p>PET.  You were the quarrel.</p>
<p>MILLA.  Me?</p>
<p>PET.  If I have a humour to quarrel, I can make less
matters conclude premises.  If you are not handsome, what
then?  If I have a humour to prove it?  If I shall have
my reward, say so; if not, fight for your face the next time
yourself—I’ll go sleep.</p>
<p>WIT.  Do, wrap thyself up like a woodlouse, and dream
revenge.  And, hear me, if thou canst learn to write by
to-morrow morning, pen me a challenge.  I’ll carry it
for thee.</p>
<p>PET.  Carry your mistress’s monkey a spider; go
flea dogs and read romances.  I’ll go to bed to my
maid.</p>
<p>MRS. FAIN.  He’s horridly drunk—how came you
all in this pickle?</p>
<p>WIT.  A plot, a plot, to get rid of the knight—your
husband’s advice; but he sneaked off.</p>
<h3>SCENE X.</h3>
<p style="text-align: center"><span class="smcap">Sir
Wilfull</span>, <i>drunk</i>, <span class="smcap">Lady
Wishfort</span>, <span class="smcap">Witwoud</span>, <span class="smcap">Mrs. Millamant</span>, <span class="smcap">Mrs.
Fainall</span>.</p>
<p>LADY.  Out upon’t, out upon’t, at years of
discretion, and comport yourself at this rantipole rate!</p>
<p>SIR WIL.  No offence, aunt.</p>
<p>LADY.  Offence?  As I’m a person, I’m
ashamed of you.  Fogh!  How you stink of wine! 
D’ye think my niece will ever endure such a Borachio? 
You’re an absolute Borachio.</p>
<p>SIR WIL.  Borachio?</p>
<p>LADY.  At a time when you should commence an amour, and
put your best foot foremost—</p>
<p>SIR WIL.  ’Sheart, an you grutch me your liquor,
make a bill.—Give me more drink, and take my purse. 
[<i>Sings</i>]:—</p>
<p class="poetry">   Prithee fill me the glass,<br/>
   Till it laugh in my face,<br/>
With ale that is potent and mellow;<br/>
   He that whines for a lass<br/>
   Is an ignorant ass,<br/>
For a bumper has not its fellow.</p>
<p>But if you would have me marry my cousin, say the word, and
I’ll do’t.  Wilfull will do’t,
that’s the word.  Wilfull will do’t,
that’s my crest,—my motto I have forgot.</p>
<p>LADY.  My nephew’s a little overtaken, cousin, but
’tis drinking your health.  O’ my word, you are
obliged to him—</p>
<p>SIR WIL.  <i>In vino veritas</i>, aunt.  If I drunk
your health to-day, cousin,—I am a Borachio.—But if
you have a mind to be married, say the word and send for the
piper; Wilfull will do’t.  If not, dust it away, and
let’s have t’other round.  Tony—ods-heart,
where’s Tony?—Tony’s an honest fellow, but he
spits after a bumper, and that’s a fault.</p>
<p class="poetry">We’ll drink and we’ll never
ha’ done, boys,<br/>
Put the glass then around with the sun, boys,<br/>
Let Apollo’s example invite us;<br/>
   For he’s drunk every night,<br/>
   And that makes him so bright,<br/>
That he’s able next morning to light us.</p>
<p>The sun’s a good pimple, an honest soaker, he has a
cellar at your antipodes.  If I travel, aunt, I touch at
your antipodes—your antipodes are a good rascally sort of
topsy-turvy fellows.  If I had a bumper I’d stand upon
my head and drink a health to ’em.  A match or no
match, cousin with the hard name; aunt, Wilfull will
do’t.  If she has her maidenhead let her look to
’t; if she has not, let her keep her own counsel in the
meantime, and cry out at the nine months’ end.</p>
<p>MILLA.  Your pardon, madam, I can stay no longer. 
Sir Wilfull grows very powerful.  Egh! how he smells! 
I shall be overcome if I stay.  Come, cousin.</p>
<h3>SCENE XI.</h3>
<p style="text-align: center"><span class="smcap">Lady
Wishfort</span>, <span class="smcap">Sir Wilfull Witwoud</span>,
<span class="smcap">Mr. Witwoud</span>, <span class="smcap">Foible</span>.</p>
<p>LADY.  Smells?  He would poison a tallow-chandler
and his family.  Beastly creature, I know not what to do
with him.  Travel, quotha; ay, travel, travel, get thee
gone, get thee but far enough, to the Saracens, or the Tartars,
or the Turks—for thou art not fit to live in a Christian
commonwealth, thou beastly pagan.</p>
<p>SIR WIL.  Turks?  No; no Turks, aunt.  Your
Turks are infidels, and believe not in the grape.  Your
Mahometan, your Mussulman is a dry stinkard.  No offence,
aunt.  My map says that your Turk is not so honest a man as
your Christian—I cannot find by the map that your Mufti is
orthodox, whereby it is a plain case that orthodox is a hard
word, aunt, and [<i>hiccup</i>] Greek for claret. 
[<i>Sings</i>]:—</p>
<p class="poetry">To drink is a Christian diversion,<br/>
Unknown to the Turk or the Persian.<br/>
   Let Mahometan fools<br/>
   Live by heathenish rules,<br/>
And be damned over tea-cups and coffee.<br/>
   But let British lads sing,<br/>
   Crown a health to the King,<br/>
And a fig for your Sultan and Sophy.</p>
<p>Ah, Tony!  [<span class="smcap">Foible</span>
<i>whispers</i> <span class="smcap">Lady</span> W.]</p>
<p>LADY.  Sir Rowland impatient?  Good lack! what shall
I do with this beastly tumbril?  Go lie down and sleep, you
sot, or as I’m a person, I’ll have you bastinadoed
with broomsticks.  Call up the wenches with broomsticks.</p>
<p>SIR WIL.  Ahey!  Wenches?  Where are the
wenches?</p>
<p>LADY.  Dear Cousin Witwoud, get him away, and you will
bind me to you inviolably.  I have an affair of moment that
invades me with some precipitation.—You will oblige me to
all futurity.</p>
<p>WIT.  Come, knight.  Pox on him, I don’t know
what to say to him.  Will you go to a cock-match?</p>
<p>SIR WIL.  With a wench, Tony?  Is she a shake-bag,
sirrah?  Let me bite your cheek for that.</p>
<p>WIT.  Horrible!  He has a breath like a
bagpipe.  Ay, ay; come, will you march, my Salopian?</p>
<p>SIR WIL.  Lead on, little Tony.  I’ll follow
thee, my Anthony, my Tantony.  Sirrah, thou shalt be my
Tantony, and I’ll be thy pig.</p>
<p class="poetry" style="text-align: center">And a fig for your
Sultan and Sophy.</p>
<p>LADY.  This will never do.  It will never make a
match,—at least before he has been abroad.</p>
<h3>SCENE XII.</h3>
<p style="text-align: center"><span class="smcap">Lady
Wishfort</span>, <span class="smcap">Waitwell</span> <i>disguised
as for</i> <span class="smcap">Sir Rowland</span>.</p>
<p>LADY.  Dear Sir Rowland, I am confounded with confusion
at the retrospection of my own rudeness,—I have more
pardons to ask than the pope distributes in the year of
jubilee.  But I hope where there is likely to be so near an
alliance, we may unbend the severity of decorum, and dispense
with a little ceremony.</p>
<p>WAIT.  My impatience, madam, is the effect of my
transport; and till I have the possession of your adorable
person, I am tantalised on the rack, and do but hang, madam, on
the tenter of expectation.</p>
<p>LADY.  You have excess of gallantry, Sir Rowland, and
press things to a conclusion with a most prevailing
vehemence.  But a day or two for decency of
marriage—</p>
<p>WAIT.  For decency of funeral, madam!  The delay
will break my heart—or if that should fail, I shall be
poisoned.  My nephew will get an inkling of my designs and
poison me—and I would willingly starve him before I
die—I would gladly go out of the world with that
satisfaction.  That would be some comfort to me, if I could
but live so long as to be revenged on that unnatural viper.</p>
<p>LADY.  Is he so unnatural, say you?  Truly I would
contribute much both to the saving of your life and the
accomplishment of your revenge.  Not that I respect myself;
though he has been a perfidious wretch to me.</p>
<p>WAIT.  Perfidious to you?</p>
<p>LADY.  O Sir Rowland, the hours that he has died away at
my feet, the tears that he has shed, the oaths that he has sworn,
the palpitations that he has felt, the trances and the
tremblings, the ardours and the ecstasies, the kneelings and the
risings, the heart-heavings and the hand-gripings, the pangs and
the pathetic regards of his protesting eyes!—Oh, no memory
can register.</p>
<p>WAIT.  What, my rival?  Is the rebel my rival? 
A dies.</p>
<p>LADY.  No, don’t kill him at once, Sir Rowland:
starve him gradually, inch by inch.</p>
<p>WAIT.  I’ll do’t.  In three weeks he
shall be barefoot; in a month out at knees with begging an alms;
he shall starve upward and upward, ’till he has nothing
living but his head, and then go out in a stink like a
candle’s end upon a save-all.</p>
<p>LADY.  Well, Sir Rowland, you have the way,—you are
no novice in the labyrinth of love,—you have the
clue.  But as I am a person, Sir Rowland, you must not
attribute my yielding to any sinister appetite or indigestion of
widowhood; nor impute my complacency to any lethargy of
continence.  I hope you do not think me prone to any
iteration of nuptials?</p>
<p>WAIT.  Far be it from me—</p>
<p>LADY.  If you do, I protest I must recede, or think that
I have made a prostitution of decorums, but in the vehemence of
compassion, and to save the life of a person of so much
importance—</p>
<p>WAIT.  I esteem it so—</p>
<p>LADY.  Or else you wrong my condescension—</p>
<p>WAIT.  I do not, I do not—</p>
<p>LADY.  Indeed you do.</p>
<p>WAIT.  I do not, fair shrine of virtue.</p>
<p>LADY.  If you think the least scruple of causality was an
ingredient—</p>
<p>WAIT.  Dear madam, no.  You are all camphire and
frankincense, all chastity and odour.</p>
<p>LADY.  Or that—</p>
<h3>SCENE XIII.</h3>
<p style="text-align: center">[<i>To them</i>] <span class="smcap">Foible</span>.</p>
<p>FOIB.  Madam, the dancers are ready, and there’s
one with a letter, who must deliver it into your own hands.</p>
<p>LADY.  Sir Rowland, will you give me leave?  Think
favourably, judge candidly, and conclude you have found a person
who would suffer racks in honour’s cause, dear Sir Rowland,
and will wait on you incessantly.</p>
<h3>SCENE XIV.</h3>
<p style="text-align: center"><span class="smcap">Waitwell</span>, <span class="smcap">Foible</span>.</p>
<p>WAIT.  Fie, fie!  What a slavery have I undergone;
spouse, hast thou any cordial?  I want spirits.</p>
<p>FOIB.  What a washy rogue art thou, to pant thus for a
quarter of an hour’s lying and swearing to a fine lady?</p>
<p>WAIT.  Oh, she is the antidote to desire.  Spouse,
thou wilt fare the worse for’t.  I shall have no
appetite to iteration of nuptials—this eight-and-forty
hours.  By this hand I’d rather be a chairman in the
dog-days than act Sir Rowland till this time to-morrow.</p>
<h3>SCENE XV.</h3>
<p style="text-align: center">[<i>To them</i>] <span class="smcap">Lady</span> <i>with a letter</i>.</p>
<p>LADY.  Call in the dancers; Sir Rowland, we’ll sit,
if you please, and see the entertainment. 
[<i>Dance</i>.]  Now, with your permission, Sir Rowland, I
will peruse my letter.  I would open it in your presence,
because I would not make you uneasy.  If it should make you
uneasy, I would burn it—speak if it does—but you may
see, the superscription is like a woman’s hand.</p>
<p>FOIB.  By heaven!  Mrs. Marwood’s, I know
it,—my heart aches—get it from her!  [<i>To
him</i>.]</p>
<p>WAIT.  A woman’s hand?  No madam, that’s
no woman’s hand: I see that already.  That’s
somebody whose throat must be cut.</p>
<p>LADY.  Nay, Sir Rowland, since you give me a proof of
your passion by your jealousy, I promise you I’ll make a
return by a frank communication.  You shall see
it—we’ll open it together.  Look you here. 
[<i>Reads</i>.]  <i>Madam</i>, <i>though unknown to you</i>
(look you there, ’tis from nobody that I know.)  <i>I
have that honour for your character</i>, <i>that I think myself
obliged to let you know you are abused</i>.  <i>He who
pretends to be Sir Rowland is a cheat and a rascal</i>.  O
heavens! what’s this?</p>
<p>FOIB.  Unfortunate; all’s ruined.</p>
<p>WAIT.  How, how, let me see, let me see. 
[<i>Reading</i>.]  <i>A rascal</i>, <i>and disguised and
suborned for that imposture</i>—O villainy! O
villainy!—<i>by the contrivance of</i>—</p>
<p>LADY.  I shall faint, I shall die.  Oh!</p>
<p>FOIB.  Say ’tis your nephew’s hand. 
Quickly, his plot, swear, swear it!  [<i>To him</i>.]</p>
<p>WAIT.  Here’s a villain!  Madam, don’t
you perceive it?  Don’t you see it?</p>
<p>LADY.  Too well, too well.  I have seen too
much.</p>
<p>WAIT.  I told you at first I knew the hand.  A
woman’s hand?  The rascal writes a sort of a large
hand: your Roman hand.—I saw there was a throat to be cut
presently.  If he were my son, as he is my nephew, I’d
pistol him.</p>
<p>FOIB.  O treachery!  But are you sure, Sir Rowland,
it is his writing?</p>
<p>WAIT.  Sure?  Am I here?  Do I live?  Do I
love this pearl of India?  I have twenty letters in my
pocket from him in the same character.</p>
<p>LADY.  How?</p>
<p>FOIB.  Oh, what luck it is, Sir Rowland, that you were
present at this juncture!  This was the business that
brought Mr. Mirabell disguised to Madam Millamant this
afternoon.  I thought something was contriving, when he
stole by me and would have hid his face.</p>
<p>LADY.  How, how?  I heard the villain was in the
house indeed; and now I remember, my niece went away abruptly
when Sir Wilfull was to have made his addresses.</p>
<p>FOIB.  Then, then, madam, Mr. Mirabell waited for her in
her chamber; but I would not tell your ladyship to discompose you
when you were to receive Sir Rowland.</p>
<p>WAIT.  Enough, his date is short.</p>
<p>FOIB.  No, good Sir Rowland, don’t incur the
law.</p>
<p>WAIT.  Law?  I care not for law.  I can but
die, and ’tis in a good cause.  My lady shall be
satisfied of my truth and innocence, though it cost me my
life.</p>
<p>LADY.  No, dear Sir Rowland, don’t fight: if you
should be killed I must never show my face; or hanged,—oh,
consider my reputation, Sir Rowland.  No, you shan’t
fight: I’ll go in and examine my niece; I’ll make her
confess.  I conjure you, Sir Rowland, by all your love not
to fight.</p>
<p>WAIT.  I am charmed, madam; I obey.  But some proof
you must let me give you: I’ll go for a black box, which
contains the writings of my whole estate, and deliver that into
your hands.</p>
<p>LADY.  Ay, dear Sir Rowland, that will be some comfort;
bring the black box.</p>
<p>WAIT.  And may I presume to bring a contract to be signed
this night?  May I hope so far?</p>
<p>LADY.  Bring what you will; but come alive, pray come
alive.  Oh, this is a happy discovery.</p>
<p>WAIT.  Dead or alive I’ll come—and married we
will be in spite of treachery; ay, and get an heir that shall
defeat the last remaining glimpse of hope in my abandoned
nephew.  Come, my buxom widow:</p>
<p class="poetry">E’er long you shall substantial proof
receive<br/>
That I’m an arrant knight—</p>
<p>FOIB.  Or arrant knave.</p>
<h2>ACT V.—SCENE I.</h2>
<p style="text-align: center"><i>Scene continues</i>.</p>
<p style="text-align: center"><span class="smcap">Lady
Wishfort</span> <i>and</i> <span class="smcap">Foible</span>.</p>
<p>LADY.  Out of my house, out of my house, thou viper, thou
serpent that I have fostered, thou bosom traitress that I raised
from nothing!  Begone, begone, begone, go, go; that I took
from washing of old gauze and weaving of dead hair, with a bleak
blue nose, over a chafing-dish of starved embers, and dining
behind a traver’s rag, in a shop no bigger than a
bird-cage.  Go, go, starve again, do, do!</p>
<p>FOIB.  Dear madam, I’ll beg pardon on my knees.</p>
<p>LADY.  Away, out, out, go set up for yourself again, do;
drive a trade, do, with your threepennyworth of small ware,
flaunting upon a packthread, under a brandy-seller’s bulk,
or against a dead wall by a balladmonger.  Go, hang out an
old frisoneer-gorget, with a yard of yellow colberteen again, do;
an old gnawed mask, two rows of pins, and a child’s fiddle;
a glass necklace with the beads broken, and a quilted night-cap
with one ear.  Go, go, drive a trade.  These were your
commodities, you treacherous trull; this was the merchandise you
dealt in, when I took you into my house, placed you next myself,
and made you governant of my whole family.  You have forgot
this, have you, now you have feathered your nest?</p>
<p>FOIB.  No, no, dear madam.  Do but hear me, have but
a moment’s patience—I’ll confess all.  Mr.
Mirabell seduced me; I am not the first that he has wheedled with
his dissembling tongue.  Your ladyship’s own wisdom
has been deluded by him; then how should I, a poor ignorant,
defend myself?  O madam, if you knew but what he promised
me, and how he assured me your ladyship should come to no damage,
or else the wealth of the Indies should not have bribed me to
conspire against so good, so sweet, so kind a lady as you have
been to me.</p>
<p>LADY.  No damage?  What, to betray me, to marry me
to a cast serving-man; to make me a receptacle, an hospital for a
decayed pimp?  No damage?  O thou frontless impudence,
more than a big-bellied actress!</p>
<p>FOIB.  Pray do but hear me, madam; he could not marry
your ladyship, madam.  No indeed, his marriage was to have
been void in law; for he was married to me first, to secure your
ladyship.  He could not have bedded your ladyship, for if he
had consummated with your ladyship, he must have run the risk of
the law, and been put upon his clergy.  Yes indeed, I
enquired of the law in that case before I would meddle or
make.</p>
<p>LADY.  What?  Then I have been your property, have
I?  I have been convenient to you, it seems, while you were
catering for Mirabell; I have been broker for you?  What,
have you made a passive bawd of me?  This exceeds all
precedent.  I am brought to fine uses, to become a botcher
of second-hand marriages between Abigails and Andrews! 
I’ll couple you.  Yes, I’ll baste you together,
you and your Philander.  I’ll Duke’s Place you,
as I’m a person.  Your turtle is in custody
already.  You shall coo in the same cage, if there be
constable or warrant in the parish.</p>
<p>FOIB.  Oh, that ever I was born!  Oh, that I was
ever married!  A bride?  Ay, I shall be a Bridewell
bride.  Oh!</p>
<h3>SCENE II.</h3>
<p style="text-align: center"><span class="smcap">Mrs.
Fainall</span>, <span class="smcap">Foible</span>.</p>
<p>MRS. FAIN.  Poor Foible, what’s the matter?</p>
<p>FOIB.  O madam, my lady’s gone for a constable; I
shall be had to a justice, and put to Bridewell to beat
hemp.  Poor Waitwell’s gone to prison already.</p>
<p>MRS. FAIN.  Have a good heart, Foible: Mirabell’s
gone to give security for him.  This is all Marwood’s
and my husband’s doing.</p>
<p>FOIB.  Yes, yes; I know it, madam: she was in my
lady’s closet, and overheard all that you said to me before
dinner.  She sent the letter to my lady, and that missing
effect, Mr. Fainall laid this plot to arrest Waitwell, when he
pretended to go for the papers; and in the meantime Mrs. Marwood
declared all to my lady.</p>
<p>MRS. FAIN.  Was there no mention made of me in the
letter?  My mother does not suspect my being in the
confederacy?  I fancy Marwood has not told her, though she
has told my husband.</p>
<p>FOIB.  Yes, madam; but my lady did not see that
part.  We stifled the letter before she read so far. 
Has that mischievous devil told Mr. Fainall of your ladyship
then?</p>
<p>MRS. FAIN.  Ay, all’s out: my affair with Mirabell,
everything discovered.  This is the last day of our living
together; that’s my comfort.</p>
<p>FOIB.  Indeed, madam, and so ’tis a comfort, if you
knew all.  He has been even with your ladyship; which I
could have told you long enough since, but I love to keep peace
and quietness by my good will.  I had rather bring friends
together than set ’em at distance.  But Mrs. Marwood
and he are nearer related than ever their parents thought
for.</p>
<p>MRS. FAIN.  Say’st thou so, Foible?  Canst
thou prove this?</p>
<p>FOIB.  I can take my oath of it, madam; so can Mrs.
Mincing.  We have had many a fair word from Madam Marwood to
conceal something that passed in our chamber one evening when you
were at Hyde Park, and we were thought to have gone
a-walking.  But we went up unawares—though we were
sworn to secrecy too: Madam Marwood took a book and swore us upon
it: but it was but a book of poems.  So long as it was not a
bible oath, we may break it with a safe conscience.</p>
<p>MRS. FAIN.  This discovery is the most opportune thing I
could wish.  Now, Mincing?</p>
<h3>SCENE III.</h3>
<p style="text-align: center">[<i>To them</i>] <span class="smcap">Mincing</span>.</p>
<p>MINC.  My lady would speak with Mrs. Foible, mem. 
Mr. Mirabell is with her; he has set your spouse at liberty, Mrs.
Foible, and would have you hide yourself in my lady’s
closet till my old lady’s anger is abated.  Oh, my old
lady is in a perilous passion at something Mr. Fainall has said;
he swears, and my old lady cries.  There’s a fearful
hurricane, I vow.  He says, mem, how that he’ll have
my lady’s fortune made over to him, or he’ll be
divorced.</p>
<p>MRS. FAIN.  Does your lady or Mirabell know that?</p>
<p>MINC.  Yes mem; they have sent me to see if Sir Wilfull
be sober, and to bring him to them.  My lady is resolved to
have him, I think, rather than lose such a vast sum as six
thousand pound.  Oh, come, Mrs. Foible, I hear my old
lady.</p>
<p>MRS. FAIN.  Foible, you must tell Mincing that she must
prepare to vouch when I call her.</p>
<p>FOIB.  Yes, yes, madam.</p>
<p>MINC.  Oh, yes mem, I’ll vouch anything for your
ladyship’s service, be what it will.</p>
<h3>SCENE IV.</h3>
<p style="text-align: center"><span class="smcap">Mrs.
Fainall</span>, <span class="smcap">Lady Wishfort</span>, <span class="smcap">Mrs. Marwood</span>.</p>
<p>LADY.  O my dear friend, how can I enumerate the benefits
that I have received from your goodness?  To you I owe the
timely discovery of the false vows of Mirabell; to you I owe the
detection of the impostor Sir Rowland.  And now you are
become an intercessor with my son-in-law, to save the honour of
my house and compound for the frailties of my daughter. 
Well, friend, you are enough to reconcile me to the bad world, or
else I would retire to deserts and solitudes, and feed harmless
sheep by groves and purling streams.  Dear Marwood, let us
leave the world, and retire by ourselves and be
shepherdesses.</p>
<p>MRS. MAR.  Let us first dispatch the affair in hand,
madam.  We shall have leisure to think of retirement
afterwards.  Here is one who is concerned in the treaty.</p>
<p>LADY.  O daughter, daughter, is it possible thou shouldst
be my child, bone of my bone, and flesh of my flesh, and as I may
say, another me, and yet transgress the most minute particle of
severe virtue?  Is it possible you should lean aside to
iniquity, who have been cast in the direct mould of virtue? 
I have not only been a mould but a pattern for you, and a model
for you, after you were brought into the world.</p>
<p>MRS. FAIN.  I don’t understand your ladyship.</p>
<p>LADY.  Not understand?  Why, have you not been
naught?  Have you not been sophisticated?  Not
understand?  Here I am ruined to compound for your caprices
and your cuckoldoms.  I must pawn my plate and my jewels,
and ruin my niece, and all little enough—</p>
<p>MRS. FAIN.  I am wronged and abused, and so are
you.  ’Tis a false accusation, as false as hell, as
false as your friend there; ay, or your friend’s friend, my
false husband.</p>
<p>MRS. MAR.  My friend, Mrs. Fainall?  Your husband my
friend, what do you mean?</p>
<p>MRS. FAIN.  I know what I mean, madam, and so do you; and
so shall the world at a time convenient.</p>
<p>MRS. MAR.  I am sorry to see you so passionate,
madam.  More temper would look more like innocence. 
But I have done.  I am sorry my zeal to serve your ladyship
and family should admit of misconstruction, or make me liable to
affronts.  You will pardon me, madam, if I meddle no more
with an affair in which I am not personally concerned.</p>
<p>LADY.  O dear friend, I am so ashamed that you should
meet with such returns.  You ought to ask pardon on your
knees, ungrateful creature; she deserves more from you than all
your life can accomplish.  Oh, don’t leave me
destitute in this perplexity!  No, stick to me, my good
genius.</p>
<p>MRS. FAIN.  I tell you, madam, you’re abused. 
Stick to you?  Ay, like a leech, to suck your best blood;
she’ll drop off when she’s full.  Madam, you
shan’t pawn a bodkin, nor part with a brass counter, in
composition for me.  I defy ’em all.  Let
’em prove their aspersions: I know my own innocence, and
dare stand a trial.</p>
<h3>SCENE V.</h3>
<p style="text-align: center"><span class="smcap">Lady
Wishfort</span>, <span class="smcap">Mrs. Marwood</span>.</p>
<p>LADY.  Why, if she should be innocent, if she should be
wronged after all, ha?  I don’t know what to think,
and I promise you, her education has been unexceptionable. 
I may say it, for I chiefly made it my own care to initiate her
very infancy in the rudiments of virtue, and to impress upon her
tender years a young odium and aversion to the very sight of men;
ay, friend, she would ha’ shrieked if she had but seen a
man till she was in her teens.  As I’m a person,
’tis true.  She was never suffered to play with a male
child, though but in coats.  Nay, her very babies were of
the feminine gender.  Oh, she never looked a man in the face
but her own father or the chaplain, and him we made a shift to
put upon her for a woman, by the help of his long garments, and
his sleek face, till she was going in her fifteen.</p>
<p>MRS. MAR.  ’Twas much she should be deceived so
long.</p>
<p>LADY.  I warrant you, or she would never have borne to
have been catechised by him, and have heard his long lectures
against singing and dancing and such debaucheries, and going to
filthy plays, and profane music meetings, where the lewd trebles
squeak nothing but bawdy, and the basses roar blasphemy. 
Oh, she would have swooned at the sight or name of an obscene
play-book—and can I think after all this that my daughter
can be naught?  What, a whore?  And thought it
excommunication to set her foot within the door of a
playhouse.  O dear friend, I can’t believe it. 
No, no; as she says, let him prove it, let him prove it.</p>
<p>MRS. MAR.  Prove it, madam?  What, and have your
name prostituted in a public court; yours and your
daughter’s reputation worried at the bar by a pack of
bawling lawyers?  To be ushered in with an <i>Oh yes</i> of
scandal, and have your case opened by an old fumbling leacher in
a quoif like a man midwife; to bring your daughter’s infamy
to light; to be a theme for legal punsters and quibblers by the
statute; and become a jest, against a rule of court, where there
is no precedent for a jest in any record, not even in Doomsday
Book.  To discompose the gravity of the bench, and provoke
naughty interrogatories in more naughty law Latin; while the good
judge, tickled with the proceeding, simpers under a grey beard,
and fidges off and on his cushion as if he had swallowed
cantharides, or sate upon cow-itch.</p>
<p>LADY.  Oh, ’tis very hard!</p>
<p>MRS. MAR.  And then to have my young revellers of the
Temple take notes, like prentices at a conventicle; and after
talk it over again in Commons, or before drawers in an
eating-house.</p>
<p>LADY.  Worse and worse.</p>
<p>MRS. MAR.  Nay, this is nothing; if it would end here
’twere well.  But it must after this be consigned by
the shorthand writers to the public press; and from thence be
transferred to the hands, nay, into the throats and lungs, of
hawkers, with voices more licentious than the loud
flounder-man’s.  And this you must hear till you are
stunned; nay, you must hear nothing else for some days.</p>
<p>LADY.  Oh ’tis insupportable.  No, no, dear
friend, make it up, make it up; ay, ay, I’ll
compound.  I’ll give up all, myself and my all, my
niece and her all, anything, everything, for composition.</p>
<p>MRS. MAR.  Nay, madam, I advise nothing, I only lay
before you, as a friend, the inconveniences which perhaps you
have overseen.  Here comes Mr. Fainall; if he will be
satisfied to huddle up all in silence, I shall be glad.  You
must think I would rather congratulate than condole with you.</p>
<h3>SCENE VI.</h3>
<p style="text-align: center"><span class="smcap">Fainall</span>,
<span class="smcap">Lady Wishfort</span>, <span class="smcap">Mrs. Marwood</span>.</p>
<p>LADY.  Ay, ay, I do not doubt it, dear Marwood.  No,
no, I do not doubt it.</p>
<p>FAIN.  Well, madam, I have suffered myself to be overcome
by the importunity of this lady, your friend, and am content you
shall enjoy your own proper estate during life, on condition you
oblige yourself never to marry, under such penalty as I think
convenient.</p>
<p>LADY.  Never to marry?</p>
<p>FAIN.  No more Sir Rowlands,—the next imposture may
not be so timely detected.</p>
<p>MRS. MAR.  That condition, I dare answer, my lady will
consent to, without difficulty; she has already but too much
experienced the perfidiousness of men.  Besides, madam, when
we retire to our pastoral solitude, we shall bid adieu to all
other thoughts.</p>
<p>LADY.  Ay, that’s true; but in case of necessity,
as of health, or some such emergency—</p>
<p>FAIN.  Oh, if you are prescribed marriage, you shall be
considered; I will only reserve to myself the power to choose for
you.  If your physic be wholesome, it matters not who is
your apothecary.  Next, my wife shall settle on me the
remainder of her fortune, not made over already; and for her
maintenance depend entirely on my discretion.</p>
<p>LADY.  This is most inhumanly savage: exceeding the
barbarity of a Muscovite husband.</p>
<p>FAIN.  I learned it from his Czarish Majesty’s
retinue, in a winter evening’s conference over brandy and
pepper, amongst other secrets of matrimony and policy, as they
are at present practised in the northern hemisphere.  But
this must be agreed unto, and that positively.  Lastly, I
will be endowed, in right of my wife, with that six thousand
pound, which is the moiety of Mrs. Millamant’s fortune in
your possession, and which she has forfeited (as will appear by
the last will and testament of your deceased husband, Sir
Jonathan Wishfort) by her disobedience in contracting herself
against your consent or knowledge, and by refusing the offered
match with Sir Wilfull Witwoud, which you, like a careful aunt,
had provided for her.</p>
<p>LADY.  My nephew was <i>non compos</i>, and could not
make his addresses.</p>
<p>FAIN.  I come to make demands—I’ll hear no
objections.</p>
<p>LADY.  You will grant me time to consider?</p>
<p>FAIN.  Yes, while the instrument is drawing, to which you
must set your hand till more sufficient deeds can be perfected:
which I will take care shall be done with all possible
speed.  In the meanwhile I will go for the said instrument,
and till my return you may balance this matter in your own
discretion.</p>
<h3>SCENE VII.</h3>
<p style="text-align: center"><span class="smcap">Lady
Wishfort</span>, <span class="smcap">Mrs. Marwood</span>.</p>
<p>LADY.  This insolence is beyond all precedent, all
parallel.  Must I be subject to this merciless villain?</p>
<p>MRS. MAR.  ’Tis severe indeed, madam, that you
should smart for your daughter’s wantonness.</p>
<p>LADY.  ’Twas against my consent that she married
this barbarian, but she would have him, though her year was not
out.  Ah! her first husband, my son Languish, would not have
carried it thus.  Well, that was my choice, this is hers;
she is matched now with a witness—I shall be mad, dear
friend; is there no comfort for me?  Must I live to be
confiscated at this rebel-rate?  Here come two more of my
Egyptian plagues too.</p>
<h3>SCENE VIII.</h3>
<p style="text-align: center">[<i>To them</i>] <span class="smcap">Mrs. Millamant</span>, <span class="smcap">Sir
Wilfull</span>.</p>
<p>SIR WIL.  Aunt, your servant.</p>
<p>LADY.  Out, caterpillar, call not me aunt; I know thee
not.</p>
<p>SIR WIL.  I confess I have been a little in disguise, as
they say.  ’Sheart! and I’m sorry
for’t.  What would you have?  I hope I committed
no offence, aunt—and if I did I am willing to make
satisfaction; and what can a man say fairer?  If I have
broke anything I’ll pay for’t, an it cost a
pound.  And so let that content for what’s past, and
make no more words.  For what’s to come, to pleasure
you I’m willing to marry my cousin.  So, pray,
let’s all be friends, she and I are agreed upon the matter
before a witness.</p>
<p>LADY.  How’s this, dear niece?  Have I any
comfort?  Can this be true?</p>
<p>MILLA.  I am content to be a sacrifice to your repose,
madam, and to convince you that I had no hand in the plot, as you
were misinformed.  I have laid my commands on Mirabell to
come in person, and be a witness that I give my hand to this
flower of knighthood; and for the contract that passed between
Mirabell and me, I have obliged him to make a resignation of it
in your ladyship’s presence.  He is without and waits
your leave for admittance.</p>
<p>LADY.  Well, I’ll swear I am something revived at
this testimony of your obedience; but I cannot admit that
traitor,—I fear I cannot fortify myself to support his
appearance.  He is as terrible to me as a Gorgon: if I see
him I swear I shall turn to stone, petrify incessantly.</p>
<p>MILLA.  If you disoblige him he may resent your refusal,
and insist upon the contract still.  Then ’tis the
last time he will be offensive to you.</p>
<p>LADY.  Are you sure it will be the last time?  If I
were sure of that—shall I never see him again?</p>
<p>MILLA.  Sir Wilfull, you and he are to travel together,
are you not?</p>
<p>SIR WIL.  ’Sheart, the gentleman’s a civil
gentleman, aunt, let him come in; why, we are sworn brothers and
fellow-travellers.  We are to be Pylades and Orestes, he and
I.  He is to be my interpreter in foreign parts.  He
has been overseas once already; and with proviso that I marry my
cousin, will cross ’em once again, only to bear me
company.  ’Sheart, I’ll call him in,—an I
set on’t once, he shall come in; and see who’ll
hinder him.  [<i>Goes to the door and hems</i>.]</p>
<p>MRS. MAR.  This is precious fooling, if it would pass;
but I’ll know the bottom of it.</p>
<p>LADY.  O dear Marwood, you are not going?</p>
<p>MRS. MAR.  Not far, madam; I’ll return
immediately.</p>
<h3>SCENE IX.</h3>
<p style="text-align: center"><span class="smcap">Lady
Wishfort</span>, <span class="smcap">Mrs. Millamant</span>, <span class="smcap">Sir Wilfull</span>, <span class="smcap">Mirabell</span>.</p>
<p>SIR WIL.  Look up, man, I’ll stand by you;
’sbud, an she do frown, she can’t kill you. 
Besides—harkee, she dare not frown desperately, because her
face is none of her own.  ’Sheart, an she should, her
forehead would wrinkle like the coat of a cream cheese; but mum
for that, fellow-traveller.</p>
<p>MIRA.  If a deep sense of the many injuries I have
offered to so good a lady, with a sincere remorse and a hearty
contrition, can but obtain the least glance of compassion. 
I am too happy.  Ah, madam, there was a time—but let
it be forgotten.  I confess I have deservedly forfeited the
high place I once held, of sighing at your feet; nay, kill me not
by turning from me in disdain, I come not to plead for
favour.  Nay, not for pardon: I am a suppliant only for
pity:—I am going where I never shall behold you more.</p>
<p>SIR WIL.  How, fellow-traveller?  You shall go by
yourself then.</p>
<p>MIRA.  Let me be pitied first, and afterwards
forgotten.  I ask no more.</p>
<p>SIR WIL.  By’r lady, a very reasonable request, and
will cost you nothing, aunt.  Come, come, forgive and
forget, aunt.  Why you must an you are a Christian.</p>
<p>MIRA.  Consider, madam; in reality you could not receive
much prejudice: it was an innocent device, though I confess it
had a face of guiltiness—it was at most an artifice which
love contrived—and errors which love produces have ever
been accounted venial.  At least think it is punishment
enough that I have lost what in my heart I hold most dear, that
to your cruel indignation I have offered up this beauty, and with
her my peace and quiet; nay, all my hopes of future comfort.</p>
<p>SIR WIL.  An he does not move me, would I may never be
o’ the quorum.  An it were not as good a deed as to
drink, to give her to him again, I would I might never take
shipping.  Aunt, if you don’t forgive quickly, I shall
melt, I can tell you that.  My contract went no farther than
a little mouth-glue, and that’s hardly dry; one doleful
sigh more from my fellow-traveller and ’tis dissolved.</p>
<p>LADY.  Well, nephew, upon your account.  Ah, he has
a false insinuating tongue.  Well, sir, I will stifle my
just resentment at my nephew’s request.  I will
endeavour what I can to forget, but on proviso that you resign
the contract with my niece immediately.</p>
<p>MIRA.  It is in writing and with papers of concern; but I
have sent my servant for it, and will deliver it to you, with all
acknowledgments for your transcendent goodness.</p>
<p>LADY.  Oh, he has witchcraft in his eyes and tongue; when
I did not see him I could have bribed a villain to his
assassination; but his appearance rakes the embers which have so
long lain smothered in my breast.  [<i>Aside</i>.]</p>
<h3>SCENE X.</h3>
<p style="text-align: center">[<i>To them</i>] <span class="smcap">Fainall</span>, <span class="smcap">Mrs.
Marwood</span>.</p>
<p>FAIN.  Your date of deliberation, madam, is
expired.  Here is the instrument; are you prepared to
sign?</p>
<p>LADY.  If I were prepared, I am not impowered.  My
niece exerts a lawful claim, having matched herself by my
direction to Sir Wilfull.</p>
<p>FAIN.  That sham is too gross to pass on me, though
’tis imposed on you, madam.</p>
<p>MILLA.  Sir, I have given my consent.</p>
<p>MIRA.  And, sir, I have resigned my pretensions.</p>
<p>SIR WIL.  And, sir, I assert my right; and will maintain
it in defiance of you, sir, and of your instrument. 
’Sheart, an you talk of an instrument sir, I have an old
fox by my thigh shall hack your instrument of ram vellum to
shreds, sir.  It shall not be sufficient for a Mittimus or a
tailor’s measure; therefore withdraw your instrument, sir,
or, by’r lady, I shall draw mine.</p>
<p>LADY.  Hold, nephew, hold.</p>
<p>MILLA.  Good Sir Wilfull, respite your valour.</p>
<p>FAIN.  Indeed?  Are you provided of your guard, with
your single beef-eater there?  But I’m prepared for
you, and insist upon my first proposal.  You shall submit
your own estate to my management, and absolutely make over my
wife’s to my sole use, as pursuant to the purport and tenor
of this other covenant.  I suppose, madam, your consent is
not requisite in this case; nor, Mr. Mirabell, your resignation;
nor, Sir Wilfull, your right.  You may draw your fox if you
please, sir, and make a bear-garden flourish somewhere else; for
here it will not avail.  This, my Lady Wishfort, must be
subscribed, or your darling daughter’s turned adrift, like
a leaky hulk to sink or swim, as she and the current of this lewd
town can agree.</p>
<p>LADY.  Is there no means, no remedy, to stop my
ruin?  Ungrateful wretch!  Dost thou not owe thy being,
thy subsistance, to my daughter’s fortune?</p>
<p>FAIN.  I’ll answer you when I have the rest of it
in my possession.</p>
<p>MIRA.  But that you would not accept of a remedy from my
hands—I own I have not deserved you should owe any
obligation to me; or else, perhaps, I could devise—</p>
<p>LADY.  Oh, what? what?  To save me and my child from
ruin, from want, I’ll forgive all that’s past; nay,
I’ll consent to anything to come, to be delivered from this
tyranny.</p>
<p>MIRA.  Ay, madam; but that is too late, my reward is
intercepted.  You have disposed of her who only could have
made me a compensation for all my services.  But be it as it
may, I am resolved I’ll serve you; you shall not be wronged
in this savage manner.</p>
<p>LADY.  How?  Dear Mr. Mirabell, can you be so
generous at last?  But it is not possible.  Harkee,
I’ll break my nephew’s match; you shall have my niece
yet, and all her fortune, if you can but save me from this
imminent danger.</p>
<p>MIRA.  Will you?  I take you at your word.  I
ask no more.  I must have leave for two criminals to
appear.</p>
<p>LADY.  Ay, ay, anybody, anybody.</p>
<p>MIRA.  Foible is one, and a penitent.</p>
<h3>SCENE XI.</h3>
<p style="text-align: center">[<i>To them</i>] <span class="smcap">Mrs. Fainall</span>, <span class="smcap">Foible</span>, <span class="smcap">Mincing</span>.</p>
<p>MRS. MAR.  O my shame!  [<span class="smcap">Mirabell</span> <i>and</i> <span class="smcap">Lady</span> <i>go to</i> <span class="smcap">Mrs.
Fainall</span> <i>and</i> <span class="smcap">Foible</span>.]  These currupt things are
brought hither to expose me.  [<i>To</i> <span class="smcap">Fainall</span>.]</p>
<p>FAIN.  If it must all come out, why let ’em know
it, ’tis but the way of the world.  That shall not
urge me to relinquish or abate one tittle of my terms; no, I will
insist the more.</p>
<p>FOIB.  Yes, indeed, madam; I’ll take my bible-oath
of it.</p>
<p>MINC.  And so will I, mem.</p>
<p>LADY.  O Marwood, Marwood, art thou false?  My
friend deceive me?  Hast thou been a wicked accomplice with
that profligate man?</p>
<p>MRS. MAR.  Have you so much ingratitude and injustice to
give credit, against your friend, to the aspersions of two such
mercenary trulls?</p>
<p>MINC.  Mercenary, mem?  I scorn your words. 
’Tis true we found you and Mr. Fainall in the blue garret;
by the same token, you swore us to secrecy upon
Messalinas’s poems.  Mercenary?  No, if we would
have been mercenary, we should have held our tongues; you would
have bribed us sufficiently.</p>
<p>FAIN.  Go, you are an insignificant thing.  Well,
what are you the better for this?  Is this Mr.
Mirabell’s expedient?  I’ll be put off no
longer.  You, thing, that was a wife, shall smart for
this.  I will not leave thee wherewithal to hide thy shame:
your body shall be naked as your reputation.</p>
<p>MRS. FAIN.  I despise you and defy your malice.  You
have aspersed me wrongfully—I have proved your
falsehood.  Go, you and your treacherous—I will not
name it, but starve together.  Perish.</p>
<p>FAIN.  Not while you are worth a groat, indeed, my
dear.  Madam, I’ll be fooled no longer.</p>
<p>LADY.  Ah, Mr. Mirabell, this is small comfort, the
detection of this affair.</p>
<p>MIRA.  Oh, in good time.  Your leave for the other
offender and penitent to appear, madam.</p>
<h3>SCENE XII.</h3>
<p style="text-align: center">[<i>To them</i>] <span class="smcap">Waitwell</span> <i>with a box of writings</i>.</p>
<p>LADY.  O Sir Rowland!  Well, rascal?</p>
<p>WAIT.  What your ladyship pleases.  I have brought
the black box at last, madam.</p>
<p>MIRA.  Give it me.  Madam, you remember your
promise.</p>
<p>LADY.  Ay, dear sir.</p>
<p>MIRA.  Where are the gentlemen?</p>
<p>WAIT.  At hand, sir, rubbing their eyes,—just risen
from sleep.</p>
<p>FAIN.  ’Sdeath, what’s this to me? 
I’ll not wait your private concerns.</p>
<h3>SCENE XIII.</h3>
<p style="text-align: center">[<i>To them</i>] <span class="smcap">Petulant</span>, <span class="smcap">Witwoud</span>.</p>
<p>PET.  How now?  What’s the matter?  Whose
hand’s out?</p>
<p>WIT.  Hey day!  What, are you all got together, like
players at the end of the last act?</p>
<p>MIRA.  You may remember, gentlemen, I once requested your
hands as witnesses to a certain parchment.</p>
<p>WIT.  Ay, I do, my hand I remember—Petulant set his
mark.</p>
<p>MIRA.  You wrong him; his name is fairly written, as
shall appear.  You do not remember, gentlemen, anything of
what that parchment contained?  [<i>Undoing the
box</i>.]</p>
<p>WIT.  No.</p>
<p>PET.  Not I.  I writ; I read nothing.</p>
<p>MIRA.  Very well, now you shall know.  Madam, your
promise.</p>
<p>LADY.  Ay, ay, sir, upon my honour.</p>
<p>MIRA.  Mr. Fainall, it is now time that you should know
that your lady, while she was at her own disposal, and before you
had by your insinuations wheedled her out of a pretended
settlement of the greatest part of her fortune—</p>
<p>FAIN.  Sir!  Pretended?</p>
<p>MIRA.  Yes, sir.  I say that this lady, while a
widow, having, it seems, received some cautions respecting your
inconstancy and tyranny of temper, which from her own partial
opinion and fondness of you she could never have
suspected—she did, I say, by the wholesome advice of
friends and of sages learned in the laws of this land, deliver
this same as her act and deed to me in trust, and to the uses
within mentioned.  You may read if you please [<i>holding
out the parchment</i>], though perhaps what is written on the
back may serve your occasions.</p>
<p>FAIN.  Very likely, sir.  What’s here? 
Damnation!  [<i>Reads</i>] <i>A Deed of Conveyance of the
whole estate real of Arabella Languish</i>, <i>widow</i>, <i>in
trust to Edward Mirabell</i>.  Confusion!</p>
<p>MIRA.  Even so, sir: ’tis the way of the world,
sir; of the widows of the world.  I suppose this deed may
bear an elder date than what you have obtained from your
lady.</p>
<p>FAIN.  Perfidious fiend!  Then thus I’ll be
revenged.  [<i>Offers to run at</i> <span class="smcap">Mrs.
Fainall</span>.]</p>
<p>SIR WIL.  Hold, sir; now you may make your bear-garden
flourish somewhere else, sir.</p>
<p>FAIN.  Mirabell, you shall hear of this, sir; be sure you
shall.  Let me pass, oaf.</p>
<p>MRS. FAIN.  Madam, you seem to stifle your
resentment.  You had better give it vent.</p>
<p>MRS. MAR.  Yes, it shall have vent, and to your
confusion, or I’ll perish in the attempt.</p>
<h3>SCENE <i>the Last</i>.</h3>
<p style="text-align: center"><span class="smcap">Lady
Wishfort</span>, <span class="smcap">Mrs. Millamant</span>, <span class="smcap">Mirabell</span>, <span class="smcap">Mrs.
Fainall</span>, <span class="smcap">Sir Wilfull</span>, <span class="smcap">Petulant</span>, <span class="smcap">Witwoud</span>, <span class="smcap">Foible</span>,
<span class="smcap">Mincing</span>, <span class="smcap">Waitwell</span>.</p>
<p>LADY.  O daughter, daughter, ’tis plain thou hast
inherited thy mother’s prudence.</p>
<p>MRS. FAIN.  Thank Mr. Mirabell, a cautious friend, to
whose advice all is owing.</p>
<p>LADY.  Well, Mr. Mirabell, you have kept your promise,
and I must perform mine.  First, I pardon for your sake Sir
Rowland there and Foible.  The next thing is to break the
matter to my nephew, and how to do that—</p>
<p>MIRA.  For that, madam, give yourself no trouble; let me
have your consent.  Sir Wilfull is my friend: he has had
compassion upon lovers, and generously engaged a volunteer in
this action, for our service, and now designs to prosecute his
travels.</p>
<p>SIR WIL.  ’Sheart, aunt, I have no mind to
marry.  My cousin’s a fine lady, and the gentleman
loves her and she loves him, and they deserve one another; my
resolution is to see foreign parts.  I have set on’t,
and when I’m set on’t I must do’t.  And if
these two gentlemen would travel too, I think they may be
spared.</p>
<p>PET.  For my part, I say little.  I think things are
best off or on.</p>
<p>WIT.  I’gad, I understand nothing of the matter:
I’m in a maze yet, like a dog in a dancing school.</p>
<p>LADY.  Well, sir, take her, and with her all the joy I
can give you.</p>
<p>MILLA.  Why does not the man take me?  Would you
have me give myself to you over again?</p>
<p>MIRA.  Ay, and over and over again.  [<i>Kisses her
hand</i>.]  I would have you as often as possibly I
can.  Well, heav’n grant I love you not too well;
that’s all my fear.</p>
<p>SIR WIL.  ’Sheart, you’ll have time enough to
toy after you’re married, or, if you will toy now, let us
have a dance in the meantime; that we who are not lovers may have
some other employment besides looking on.</p>
<p>MIRA.  With all my heart, dear Sir Wilfull.  What
shall we do for music?</p>
<p>FOIB.  Oh, sir, some that were provided for Sir
Rowland’s entertainment are yet within call.  [<i>A
dance</i>.]</p>
<p>LADY.  As I am a person, I can hold out no longer: I have
wasted my spirits so to-day already that I am ready to sink under
the fatigue; and I cannot but have some fears upon me yet, that
my son Fainall will pursue some desperate course.</p>
<p>MIRA.  Madam, disquiet not yourself on that account: to
my knowledge his circumstances are such he must of force
comply.  For my part I will contribute all that in me lies
to a reunion.  In the meantime, madam [<i>to</i> <span class="smcap">Mrs. Fainall</span>], let me before these witnesses
restore to you this deed of trust: it may be a means, well
managed, to make you live easily together.</p>
<p class="poetry">From hence let those be warned, who mean to
wed,<br/>
Lest mutual falsehood stain the bridal-bed:<br/>
For each deceiver to his cost may find<br/>
That marriage frauds too oft are paid in kind.</p>
<p style="text-align: right">[<i>Exeunt Omnes</i>.</p>
<h2>EPILOGUE.</h2>
<p style="text-align: center">Spoken by <span class="smcap">Mrs.
Bracegirdle</span>.</p>
<p class="poetry"><span class="smcap">After</span> our Epilogue
this crowd dismisses,<br/>
I’m thinking how this play’ll be pulled to pieces.<br/>
But pray consider, e’er you doom its fall,<br/>
How hard a thing ’twould be to please you all.<br/>
There are some critics so with spleen diseased,<br/>
They scarcely come inclining to be pleased:<br/>
And sure he must have more than mortal skill<br/>
Who pleases anyone against his will.<br/>
Then, all bad poets we are sure are foes,<br/>
And how their number’s swelled the town well knows<br/>
In shoals, I’ve marked ’em judging in the pit;<br/>
Though they’re on no pretence for judgment fit,<br/>
But that they have been damned for want of wit.<br/>
Since when, they, by their own offences taught,<br/>
Set up for spies on plays, and finding fault.<br/>
Others there are whose malice we’d prevent:<br/>
Such, who watch plays, with scurrilous intent<br/>
To mark out who by characters are meant:<br/>
And though no perfect likeness they can trace,<br/>
Yet each pretends to know the copied face.<br/>
These, with false glosses, feed their own ill-nature,<br/>
And turn to libel what was meant a satire.<br/>
May such malicious fops this fortune find,<br/>
To think themselves alone the fools designed:<br/>
If any are so arrogantly vain,<br/>
To think they singly can support a scene,<br/>
And furnish fool enough to entertain.<br/>
For well the learned and the judicious know,<br/>
That satire scorns to stoop so meanly low,<br/>
As any one abstracted fop to show.<br/>
For, as when painters form a matchless face,<br/>
They from each fair one catch some diff’rent grace,<br/>
And shining features in one portrait blend,<br/>
To which no single beauty must pretend:<br/>
So poets oft do in one piece expose<br/>
Whole <i>belles assemblées</i> of coquettes and beaux.</p>

