<?xml version="1.0" encoding="utf-8"?>
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xmlns:epub="http://www.idpf.org/2007/ops" epub:prefix="z3998: http://www.daisy.org/z3998/2012/vocab/structure/, se: https://standardebooks.org/vocab/1.0" xml:lang="en-GB">
	<head>
		<title>Commendatory Verses</title>
		<link href="../css/core.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
		<link href="../css/local.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
	</head>
	<body epub:type="frontmatter z3998:non-fiction">
		<section id="commendatory-verses" epub:type="preamble">
			<h2 epub:type="title">Commendatory Verses</h2>
			<p>To <abbr>Mr.</abbr> Congreve, occasioned by his Comedy called <i epub:type="se:name.publication.play">The Way of the World</i></p>
			<blockquote epub:type="z3998:verse">
				<p>
					<span>When pleasure’s falling to the low delight,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>In the vain joys of the uncertain sight;<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-2" id="noteref-2" epub:type="noteref">2</a></span>
					<br/>
					<span>No sense of wit when rude spectators know,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>But in distorted gesture, farce and show;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>How could, great author, your aspiring mind</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Dare to write only to the few refined?</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Yet though that nice ambition you pursue,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>’Tis not in Congreve’s power to please but few.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Implicitly devoted to his fame,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Well-dressed barbarians know his awful name;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Though senseless they’re of mirth, but when they laugh,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>As they feel wine, but when, till drunk, they quaff.<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-3" id="noteref-3" epub:type="noteref">3</a></span>
					<br/>
					<span>On you from fate a lavish portion fell</span>
					<br/>
					<span>In every way of writing to excel.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Your muse applause to Arabella<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-4" id="noteref-4" epub:type="noteref">4</a> brings,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>In notes as sweet as Arabella sings.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Whene’er you draw an undissembled woe,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>With sweet distress your rural numbers flow:</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Pastora’s the complaint of every swain,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Pastora still the echo of the plain!</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Or if your muse describe, with warming force,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>The wounded Frenchman falling from his horse;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And her own William glorious in the strife,<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-5" id="noteref-5" epub:type="noteref">5</a></span>
					<br/>
					<span>Bestowing on the prostrate foe his life:</span>
					<br/>
					<span>You the great act as generously rehearse,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And all the English fury’s in your verse.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>By your selected scenes and handsome choice,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Ennobled Comedy exalts her voice;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>You check unjust esteem and fond desire,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And teach to scorn what else we should admire:</span>
					<br/>
					<span>The just impression taught by you we bear,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>The player acts the world, the world the player;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Whom still that world unjustly disesteems,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Though he alone professes what he seems.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>But when your muse assumes her tragic part,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>She conquers and she reigns in every heart:</span>
					<br/>
					<span>To mourn with her men cheat their private woe,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And generous pity’s all the grief they know.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>The widow, who, impatient of delay,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>From the town joys must mask it to the play,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Joins with your Mourning Bride’s resistless moan,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And weeps a loss she slighted when her own:</span>
					<br/>
					<span>You give us torment, and you give us ease,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And vary our afflictions as you please.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Is not a heart so kind as yours in pain,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>To load your friends with cares you only feign;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Your friends in grief, composed yourself, to leave?</span>
					<br/>
					<span>But ’tis the only way you’ll e’er deceive.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Then still, great sir, your moving power employ.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>To lull our sorrow, and correct our joy.</span>
				</p>
			</blockquote>
			<p class="signature">Richard Steele.</p>
		</section>
	</body>
</html>
