<?xml version="1.0" encoding="utf-8"?>
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xmlns:epub="http://www.idpf.org/2007/ops" epub:prefix="z3998: http://www.daisy.org/z3998/2012/vocab/structure/, se: https://standardebooks.org/vocab/1.0" xml:lang="en-GB">
	<head>
		<title>Epilogue</title>
		<link href="../css/core.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
		<link href="../css/local.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
	</head>
	<body epub:type="bodymatter z3998:fiction">
		<section id="epilogue" epub:type="chapter">
			<h2 epub:type="title">Epilogue</h2>
			<p>Spoken by <abbr>Mrs.</abbr> Bracegirdle.</p>
			<blockquote epub:type="z3998:verse">
				<p>
					<span>After our Epilogue this crowd dismisses,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>I’m thinking how this play’ll be pulled to pieces.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>But pray consider, e’er you doom its fall,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>How hard a thing ’twould be to please you all.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>There are some critics so with spleen diseased,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>They scarcely come inclining to be pleased:</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And sure he must have more than mortal skill</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Who pleases anyone against his will.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Then, all bad poets we are sure are foes,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And how their number’s swelled the town well knows</span>
					<br/>
					<span>In shoals, I’ve marked ’em judging in the pit;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Though they’re on no pretence for judgment fit,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>But that they have been damned for want of wit.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Since when, they, by their own offences taught,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Set up for spies on plays, and finding fault.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Others there are whose malice we’d prevent:</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Such, who watch plays, with scurrilous intent</span>
					<br/>
					<span>To mark out who by characters are meant:</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And though no perfect likeness they can trace,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Yet each pretends to know the copied face.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>These, with false glosses, feed their own ill-nature,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And turn to libel what was meant a satire.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>May such malicious fops this fortune find,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>To think themselves alone the fools designed:</span>
					<br/>
					<span>If any are so arrogantly vain,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>To think they singly can support a scene,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And furnish fool enough to entertain.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>For well the learned and the judicious know,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>That satire scorns to stoop so meanly low,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>As any one abstracted fop to show.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>For, as when painters form a matchless face,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>They from each fair one catch some diff’rent grace,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And shining features in one portrait blend,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>To which no single beauty must pretend:</span>
					<br/>
					<span>So poets oft do in one piece expose</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Whole <i>belles assemblées</i> of coquettes and beaux.</span>
				</p>
			</blockquote>
		</section>
	</body>
</html>
