<?xml version="1.0" encoding="utf-8"?>
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xmlns:epub="http://www.idpf.org/2007/ops" epub:prefix="z3998: http://www.daisy.org/z3998/2012/vocab/structure/, se: https://standardebooks.org/vocab/1.0" xml:lang="en-GB">
	<head>
		<title>Prologue</title>
		<link href="../css/core.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
		<link href="../css/local.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
	</head>
	<body epub:type="bodymatter z3998:fiction">
		<section id="prologue" epub:type="chapter">
			<h2 epub:type="title">Prologue</h2>
			<p>Spoken by <abbr>Mr.</abbr> Betterton.</p>
			<blockquote epub:type="z3998:verse">
				<p>
					<span><strong>Of</strong> those few fools, who with ill stars are curst,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Sure scribbling fools, called poets, fare the worst:</span>
					<br/>
					<span>For they’re a sort of fools which fortune makes,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And, after she has made ’em fools, forsakes.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>With Nature’s oafs ’tis quite a diff’rent case,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>For Fortune favours all her idiot race.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>In her own nest the cuckoo eggs we find,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>O’er which she broods to hatch the changeling kind:<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-6" id="noteref-6" epub:type="noteref">6</a></span>
					<br/>
					<span>No portion for her own she has to spare,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>So much she dotes on her adopted care.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>Poets are bubbles, by the town drawn in,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Suffered at first some trifling stakes to win:</span>
					<br/>
					<span>But what unequal hazards do they run!</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Each time they write they venture all they’ve won:</span>
					<br/>
					<span>The Squire that’s buttered still, is sure to be undone.<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-7" id="noteref-7" epub:type="noteref">7</a></span>
					<br/>
					<span>This author, heretofore, has found your favour,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>But pleads no merit from his past behaviour.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>To build on that might prove a vain presumption,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Should grants to poets made admit resumption,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And in Parnassus he must lose his seat,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>If that be found a forfeited estate.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>He owns, with toil he wrought the following scenes,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>But if they’re naught ne’er spare him for his pains:</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Damn him the more; have no commiseration</span>
					<br/>
					<span>For dullness on mature deliberation.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>He swears he’ll not resent one hissed-off scene,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Nor, like those peevish wits, his play maintain,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Who, to assert their sense, your taste arraign.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Some plot we think he has, and some new thought;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Some humour too, no farce⁠—but that’s a fault.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Satire, he thinks, you ought not to expect;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>For so reformed a town who dares correct?</span>
					<br/>
					<span>To please, this time, has been his sole pretence,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>He’ll not instruct, lest it should give offence.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Should he by chance a knave or fool expose,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>That hurts none here, sure here are none of those.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>In short, our play shall (with your leave to show it)</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Give you one instance of a passive poet,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Who to your judgments yields all resignation:</span>
					<br/>
					<span>So save or damn, after your own discretion.</span>
				</p>
			</blockquote>
		</section>
	</body>
</html>
